Dante Notes: Divina Commedia

6 elements of Dante's passion:
1. The Encyclopedia.  2.  The Journey  3. The Vision 4. The Autobiography 5. The Praise of Woman 6. Allegory

Canto I: Inferno

45 tercets, and 1 concluding line: total: 136 lines

Time: Good Friday morning after the tortured night of April 7th, April 8th of the Jubilee Year 1300 A.D.

1  Nel mezzo del cammin di nostra vita
2  mi retrovai per una selva oscura
3  che' la diritta via era smarrita.
1  Midway upon the journey of our life
2  I found myself within a forest dark,
3  For the straightforward pathway had been lost.

The first tercet: We begin in the dark, in the midst of a threatening confusion.  The Moralist's  bias here favors light and straightness, while the confusion paradoxically prompts the Poet to his calling.  Compare Blake's aphorism: Improvement makes straight roads, but the crooked roads without Improvement, are roads of genius.  The diachronic time sequence begins here, one Dante, the aspirant, following on his journey through Hell, Purgatory, and Paradise, and one Dante, the narrator, who has already completed the journey and is relating his experiences.  Maybe the first Dante is the Poet, the perpetual beginner as Rilke says, and the second, the Moralist.

4  Ahi quanto a dir qual era e cosa dura
5  esta selva selvaggia e aspra e forte
6  che nel pensier rinova la paura!

4  Ah me! how hard a thing it is to say
5  What was this forest savage, rough, and stern,
6 Which in the very thought renews the fear.

The second triplet: The theme of both the inarticulate, and a warning that the words and the matter to be related are wild (selvaggia), aspra (rough), forte (stern, strong medicine), and the mere contemplation of it, even in retrospect, renews the original fear (la paura).  This is why traumas are so hard to resolve, we essentially suppress them, because we do not want to relive 
them, and we substitute for the feeling, a story about the feeling.  Dante is telling us that his 
story is going to be the feeling, not just something about the feeling.

7  Tant' e amara che poco a pui morte;
8  Ma per trattar del ben ch'i vi trovai,
9  Diro' de l'altre cose ch'i v'ho scorte.

7  So bitter is it, death is little more;
8  But of the good to treat, which there I found,
9  Speak will I of the other things I saw there.


The third triplet: The theme of risk, of death, and of the willingness to traverse a bitter (amara) landscape, as poet, in order to save the reader.  (Remember: one of the readers is Dante's ordinary mundane self, who is reading his poetic, inspired self's words.)  These two, Poet and Audience, like the couple of Poet and Moralist, have to be willing to endure an onslaught of images on the spiritual-artistic-creator-audience journey, many of which may be both difficult to contemplate, and difficult to understand.

10  Io non so ben ridir com'i' v'intrai,
11  tant'era pien di sonno a quel punto
12  che la verace via abbandonai.

10  I cannot well repeat how there I entered,
11  So full was I of slumber at the moment
12  In which I had abandoned the true way.

The fourth triplet: The beginning is lost in the obscurity of sleep, the unconscious, and it is also found there.  This true way, "la verace via", is the road of the poem itself, the creative act of writing or speaking, of reading or listening.  The first thing that a poet has to do is to listen to and trust his poetic self, although the self is forever obscured in the unconscious, or in Dante's vernacular, in a shade, a soul, that is undefined and undefinable.

13  Ma poi ch'i' fui al pie' d'un colle giunto,
14  'La dove terminava quella valle
15  che m'avea di paura il cor compunto,

16  guardai in alto, e vidi le sue spalle
17  vestite gai' de' raggi del pianeta
18  che mena dritto altrui per ogne calle.
13  But after I had reached a mountain's foot,
14  At that point where the valley terminated,
15  Which had with consternation pierced my heart,
16  Upward I looked, and I beheld its shoulders,
17  Vested already with that planet's rays
18  Which leadeth others right by every road.
Like Freud, who created a map of the unconscious, Libido, Ego, Superego, etc., Dante from the first few lines is creating an intelligible geography of the soul: The dark wood, the mountain with the first light hitting its crown, the valley where he (the poet in incubation) is beginning his quest.  Poignant here is his statement in line 18 that "others" can follow the road that he has left, but not him.  But what has he left the journey of the orthodox for?  The journey of the poem.  The pattern of light, high, up, clear and their opposites: dark, low, down, fogginess is being established.  Dante here is also hinting that others (the orthodox) can take an easier road (in fact, any road, ogne calle, will lead up), but the outcasts, the reader, and the poet, the questioners, the doubters, must travel a more arduous path, as explorers, and perhaps later, if they make it, as way-showers.

19  Allor fu la paura un poco queta
20  che nel lago del cor m'era durata 
21  la notte ch'i' passai con tanta pieta.

19  Then was the fear a little quieted
20  That in my heart's lake had endured throughout
21  The night, which I had passed so piteously.

Very I Ching-like metaphors here, the heart as a lake, calmed at the foot of a mountain, the mountain catching the sun's first rays of light.  Also, we learn here about having to endure (brilliant echo in the word durata in line 20, and the word dura in line 4) a piteous night.  Insomnia here is described as a metaphysical state —the paradox of being full of sleep, but unable to sleep.  Start paying attention to the word pieta, translated as pity, or pitiful, or piteous.   But that translation doesn't seem to capture the feeling of compassion elicited by viewing or hearing about the suffering of another, a feeling which will be thoroughly examined as Dante descends into a land of retributions and punishments.  Note also the relationship between pity and piety.  

22  E come quei che con lena affannata
23  uscito fuor del pelago al la riva
24  si volge a l'acqua perighiosa e guata,

25  cosi l'animo mio, ch'ancor fuggiva,
26  si volse a retro a rimirar lo passo
27  che non lascio' gai mai persona viva.
22  And even as he, who, with distressful breath,
23  Forth issued from the sea upon the shore,
24  Turns to the water perilous and gazes;
25  So did my soul, that still was fleeing onward,
26  Turn itself back to re-behold the pass
27  Which never yet a living person left.
The archetype here is of the night sea journey, and the aspirant, looking back — which is what he's doing by writing the poem — looking back on the water he's escaped from.  This is the voyage of the dead, and this metaphor of a sea passage will be renewed in Purgatorio as the souls arrive from having given up the troubled breath of life (the death rattle echoes here).  Note here also the word fuggiva, refuge and fugitive, both, from the word fuga, perhaps, "la fuga", meaning escape.  The crossing of water also occurs when the damned are ferried to hell in a later canto.  Water of course has the multiple meanings of unformed chaos, of source or of baptism.  Again, Blake echoes this in his drawing of Newton, seated on coral at the bottom of the sea of material space and time.

28  Poi ch'ei passato un poco il corpo lasso,
29  represi via per la piaggia diserta,
30  si' che 'l pie' fermo sempre era 'l piu basso.

28  After my weary body I had rested,
29  The way resumed I on the desert slope,
30  So that the firm foot ever was the lower.

The famous passage here in which Dante turns a metaphor of the body into a metaphysical instruction.  Firm footing on a climb is always leveraged from the lowest and hardest (most difficult) realization.  Whatever we might aspire to (note how the word aspire relates to height.) begins with our most fundamental needs and necessities.  Another way to put it, is that the pursuit of an ideal is only grounded when it rests first on the hard realization of exactly where you are on the climb.  You can't get ahead of yourself, even by one step, or down you go again.  Now, when Dante the quester, the fugitive, tries to climb, three bestial obstacles confront him: parts of himself that are too threatening and too savage to be recognized as his own face, but wherever he turns his face: they are there to stop him from looking away.

Language note: piaggia diserta: a sandy disserted shore.  Piaggia, not riva, the word used in line 23.  If you need to know why this is important, just recall how difficult it is to climb a hill of sand.

31  Ed ecco, quasi al cominciar de l'erta,
32  una lonza leggera e presta molto,
33  che di pel macolato era coverta.

34  e non mi si partia dinanzi al volto,
35  anzi 'mpediva tanto il mio cammino,
36  ch'i' fui per ritomar piu volte volto.
31  And lo! almost where the ascent began,
32  A panther light and swift exceedingly,
33  Which with a spotted skin was covered o'er!
34  And never moved she from before my face,
35  Nay, rather did impede so much my way,
36  That many times I to return had turned.
(The poetics here are stunning, especially in the repetition of the word cammino (from line 1), and the face to face play on the words volte and volto — times as in number of times, and face, the face of Dante and the face of the panther (una lonza).  Very succinctly Dante puts us face to face with ourselves and the linear time that is our mortal body's passage from birth to death.  At the very beginning the aspirant is driven back by some spotted beast (una lonza) which is both, nimble and fast, and has a blotched skin.  A spotted skin could indicate a disease, of a corruption that is beginning to break out on the surface, or a kind of moral plague or leprosy, in which the purity of every good inclination is spotted with some canker of collateral damage, either to self or others.  This beast, like a mirror, stays in front of the aspirant's face whichever way he turns, because it is his own reflection.  Fugitives, readers or writers, cannot escape or find refuge from themselves.  Their problem seems outside them, but it is only a projection of themselves that they refuse to see.  

The next lines renew the time theme, a description of the dawn, and not just any dawn, but the dawn of Good Friday, the crucifixion that will lead to salvation.  The aspirant's sight is raised by the cross and the vision of unjust torment and death, the beginning of pity, of piety.  This is the aspirant's hope, in spite of his own bestial nature.

37  Temp'era dal principio del mattino,
38  e 'l sol montava 'n su' con quelle stelle
39  ch'eran con lui quando l'amor divino

40  mosse di prima quelle cose belle;
41  si ch'a bene sperar m'era cagione
42  di quella fiera a la gaetta pelle

43  l'ora del tempo e la dolce stagione;
44  ma non si che paura non mi desse
45  la vista che m'apparve d'un leone.

46  Questi parea che contra me venisse
47  con la test'alta e con rabbiosa fame,
48  Si che parea che l'aere ne tremesse.
37  The time was the beginning of the morning,
38  And up the sun was mounting with those stars
39  That with him were, what time the Love Divine
40  At first in motion set those beauteous things;
41  So were to me occasion of good hope,
42  The variegated skin of that wild beast,
43  The hour of time, and the delicious season;
44  But not so much, that did not give me fear
45  A lion's aspect which appeared to me.
46  He seemed as if against me he were coming
47  With head uplifted, and with ravenous hunger,
48  So that it seemed the air was afraid of him;

Again, amazing and complex poetics, merging the light of dawn and the last remaining stars, with the fiera a la gaetta pelle, the fiery spots of the panther.  It is spring, la dolce stagione, the sweet season, but the aspirant's fear remains, his own bestial appetites appearing before him as a lion's face.  (Of the three beasts, this lion is the only one who could definitely be called male, so in the language of Jung, there are three shadow-sides that appear upon first awakening and getting a glimpse of the path towards individuation.  1) The ambivalent spotted panther or leopard, a confused anima-type figure, the male lion, 2) the male animus (the word here in English would be animosity, the pride of the male to dominate, and to view other males as their enemies), and finally 3) the she-wolf (una lupa), the last and most ferocious obstacle.  Note the two uses of parea, seemed, resembled, the equivocation tells us that this is not a "literal" lion, not a physical but a metaphysical challenge, and when it raises its head (the head of reason perverted by selfish appetite), it seems as if the very air (the breath of contemplation when first encountering distorted aspects of the soul that have been repressed) is trembling.  We are breathing in everyone's fear, anger, ambition, hunger.  Melville has a similar image in Moby Dick when he reminds us that the air of this earth is polluted by all those who have died exhaling it.

Note: Scholars have had a centuries-long debate as to whether Dante intended his journey to be taken literally, or if the entire Commedia is an allegory, such as The Dream of Scipio, or The Pilgrim's Progress.  I think Dante as a writer did everything he could to give his journey a physical presence.  You never think you have left the domain of the literal, physical body, a person situated in historical space and time.  And yet at the same time, he never allows the reader to be free of the ambiguity that there are dimensions beyond the literal interpretation — allegorical dimensions that have the same relationship to the body as thoughts do to the physical brain.  I think as an either/or argument, the point is moot.  It's both/and.

Next we come to the She-wolf:

49  Ed una lupa, che di tutte brame
50  sembiava carca ne la sua magrezza,
51  molte genti fe'gia viver grame,

52  questa mi porse tanto di gravezza
53  con la paura ch'uscia di sua vista,
54  ch'io perdie la speranza de l'altezza.
55  And a she-wolf, that with all hungerings
56  Seemed to be laden in her meagreness,
57  And many folk has caused to live forlorn!
58  She brought upon me so much heaviness,
59  With the affright that from her aspect came,
60  That I the hope relinquished of the height.
The image of starvation and the fear of lack, turned back on the aspiring self, perhaps in those terrible words of the earthly parental admonition: Be practical, don't waste your time with a spiritual or artistic aspiration, that won't put meat on your table or meat on your bones.  Dante here makes sure that we understand that this third beast, the starving and neglected anima, causes him to return to his original torpor (gravezza, heaviness, sluggishness, tied to the idea of gravity, that which pulls us down when we want to climb up, that which is the heaviness of the mortal flesh, when it tries to ascend a spiritual height, that which darkens light and kills hope (la speranza).  Note the rhyme of gravezza and altezza, gravity, or seriousness, and height.  More of the schema of up and down, that which draws us up contra natura, or against nature, as Jung calls the journey of individuation, and the physical mortal body which pulls us down.  The thinness of the she-wolf is lack in every sense, but for the artist or spiritual aspirant this is lack in the sense of: I am not good enough yet to start the spiritual journey.  I must read another book, go to another weekend course on spirituality, and then I will be ready.  Remember: spiritual birth, like death, is always premature.

Language note: The rhyming of brame (longings) with grame (forlorn)  — very Buddhist: to have longings, appetites, is inevitably the cause of suffering.

This is an important turning point, hope also is surrendered, because at this juncture, there is still a false belief that the divided (into the 3 beasts here) and foggy self can devise a plan to overcome the very terrors which the ego-self has used to build its identity.  This is really a question of Who am I?  Dante, the aspirant does not know, and what's more, he is too pulled down by moral ambivalence (the spotted panther), male dominating aggressiveness (the lion), and fear of lack (the she wolf), to be able to continue on the spiritual path without help.  Where is that help going to come from?   The aspirant doesn't have a clue.  Depression follows.  No pill to take here to ease that descent, which Dante the aspirant, the floundering quester, describes next, in a passage that makes clear that help is not to be acquired by will power (volontieri acquista).

55  E qual e quei che volontieri acquista,
56  a ginghe 'l tempo che perder lo face,
57  che 'n tutt'i suoi pensier piange e s'attrista;

58  tal mi fece la bestia sanza pace,
59  che, venendomi  'ncontro, a poco a poco
60 mi ripigneva la dove 'l sol tace.

 61  Mentre ch'i' rovinava in basso loco,
 62  dinanzi a li occhi mi si fu offerto
 63  chi per lungo silenzio parea fioco.
55  And as he is who willingly acquires,
56  And the time comes that causes him to lose,
57  Who weeps in all his thoughts and is despondent,
58  E'en such made me that beast withouten peace,
59  Which, coming on against me by degrees
60  Thrust me back thither where the sun is silent.
61  While I was rushing downward to the lowland,
62  Before mine eyes did one present himself,
63  Who seemed from long-continued silence hoarse.
Realizing the futility of his efforts (note the wonderful rhymed paring of acquista — acquiring — and s'attrista — self-generated sadness), little by little, the aspirant slips back, withdrawing 
from the touch of the sun, and returning to the lowest point again, when suddenly, his eyes are offered a glimpse of a something or a someone: someone who from long silence seems weak, 
that is to say, someone roused from a deep state of contemplation or coma, and who now 
endavors to speak.  (The word, fioco, translated here as hoarse, is more often translated as 
weak.  Hoarse comes from shouting, weak comes from being roused from sleep.)  

This is crucial too, because it points out that our guides and mentors also have problems: How
do they speak about something that the aspirant has never experienced, and how do they
speak in a voice that can be heard?  Dante points out here that the guide's words
are not necessarily going to be beautiful or easy to hear.  The aspirant here admits 
his helplessness, and cries out to this image with a meager voice, not knowing 
if he is talking to a physical man or a shade, another person or his own or another's  shadow.  
He cries out for compassion to the only projected image so far which does not threaten and 
impede him.  But his cry here shows that he has made a fundamental mistake.  The aspirant 
mistakes the soul as less fundamental than un omo certo (modern spelling uomo certo), i.e. a 
real man.  In some sense, the poem in its entirety is a battleground wherein the unsubstantial, 
the subtle, the soul and the flesh, the uomo certo, the real material person, are involved in a 
struggle over which aspect of the self will have the authority to guide action, will have the 
substantiality to be. 

64  Quando vidi costui nel gran diserto,
65  “Miserere di me,” gridai a lui,
66  “qual che tu sii, od ombra od omo certo!”

67  Rispuosemi: “Non omo, omo già fui,
68  e li parenti miei furon lombardi,
69  mantoani per patrïa ambedui.

70  Nacqui sub Iulio, ancor che fosse tardi,
71  e vissi a Roma sotto 'l buono Augusto
72  nel tempo de li dèi falsi e bugiardi.

73  Poeta fui, e cantai di quel giusto
74  figliuol d'Anchise che venne di Troia,
75  poi che 'l superbo Ilïón fu combusto.
64  When I beheld him in the desert vast,
65  "Have pity on me," unto him I cried,
66  "Whiche'er thou art, or shade or real man!"
67  He answered me: "Not man; man once I was,
68  And both my parents were of Lombardy,
69  And Mantuans by country both of them.
70  'Sub Julio' was I born, though it was late,
71  And lived at Rome under the good Augustus,
72  During the time of false and lying gods.
73  A poet was I, and I sang that just
74  Son of Anchises, who came forth from Troy,
75  During the time of false and lying gods.
A critical passage which seems just informational, but it begins to reinforce a persistent aspect of Dante's style in mythologizing or psychologizing history and historicizing myth.  
The place and time is important for those incarnated in place and time.  Just as in
Christianity it is crucial that Jesus has brought the timeless, placeless spiritual down 
into a specific point in history, a specific human body dealing with the specificities
of mortal life.  Note here too, that the word parenti, not the word genitori is used by the shade to describe where he is from.  Parenti, doesn't just mean human parents (which would be 
genitori), but patria: homeland.  That patria is the only word available to Dante and not
some word like matria (motherland, not fatherland), foreshadows, probably forever unknown 
to the historical Dante, the whole struggle between feminine nature and masculine 
culture, as it was lived in Dante's time, and also in our own.  That these two are
separated (Dante is separated from Beatrice, exiled from his patria) is the spiritual 
split that the poem is attempting to heal.  There are also something like "space spirits"
which seem to be obliquely referred to here.  Dante and Virgil separated in time by
about 13 centuries are still united, brothers or siblings so to speak, because they
are both Lombards from Mantua.  There is a difference in these brothers united
by space, and that difference is that they are divided by time, and the historical
event of the Savior's incarnation.  Virgil lived in a time where the divine was
divided into many pagan gods, and not made one by a spiritual historical
incarnation.  Virgil, qua Virgil, by virtue of this split in time, cannot reach
certain spiritual heights because the time of his human, historical experience
precluded that view of the soul.  He can know about justice, retribution,
even the purging of the soul, but the idea of unmerited grace is not something
he experienced as part of being a mortal human being.  The reader will
see how this plays out as the poem progresses.

Note: Some Native Americans instead of asking each other What do you do? What is your 
occupation?, ask instead: Where are your mother's people from?  And if you ask this question of yourself, you get a very different answer than if you think of yourself in the context of your 
patronym. 

76  Ma tu perché ritorni a tanta noia?
77  perché non sali il dilettoso monte
78  ch'è principio e cagion di tutta gioia?”

79  “Or se' tu quel Virgilio e quella fonte
80  che spandi di parlar sì largo fiume?”
81  rispuos' io lui con vergognosa fronte.

76  But thou, why goest thou back to such annoyance?
77  Why climb'st thou not the Mount Delectable,
78  Which is the source and cause of every joy?"

79  "Now, art thou that Virgilius and that fountain
80  Which spreads abroad so wide a river of speech?"
81  I made response to him with bashful forehead.

The question here is really an accusation.  Why does the dog return to his vomit?
Why does the spiritual aspirant, once awakening to the light, not proceed
upward to its source?  He already knows that his former way of living has
led to the three beasts and the terror of befuddlement, confusion, and raw and threatening
appetite, so why choose that path and ignore the path of the mountain, which is
the way of delight and the beginning and cause of all joy?  Here, the aspirant 
ignores the question, and instead remains in awe of the messenger's mere
presence in his predicament.  The recognition scene: Dante realizes
that this shade is that of Virgil, his poetic idol, and he is abashed.  He drops
his head.  Contrast this with the lion with raised head and open jaws.  It is however,
a false recognition scene, but neither we, the reader aspirants, nor Dante, the 
protagonist and spiritual chela, can know that at this point.  But it's worth keeping
in mind, because it goes to the heart of what is most fundamental in life.

Another great rhyme of lume (light) and volume (volume, book).

Dante goes on, in awe, telling Virgil, rather redundantly what Virgil obviously
already knows about himself.  Which is: being a great poet might 
get you fame, but it won't redeem you, unless there is that illogical unmerited
grace in what you do.  We moderns might view this unmerited grace as
those fortuitous synchronicities that lift us out of the spinning
squirrel cage of our own efforts, and which knock us out of the
not-so-merry-go-round of our obsessions, our thoughts, our beliefs.  It is only this grace 
which can put us on the path that leads "up" to liberation.  Dante pleads here for a life
of scholarship, the time and ease to study and learn from Virgil's book,
and, like Christ who prays for the bitter cup to pass, Dante wants this comfort.
But he is only thinking about the beautiful style of Virgil's, which he has copied.  He is only 
thinking of the way of beauty and of adornment with honors, and not of the hardship that
his spiritual journey requires.  At this point, Dante the aspirant is willing to 
accept the technical help which Virgil the master poet can provide, but he
is not ready for the grace of his own verse being given a moving inner content, which Virgil 
cannot supply, as we will see much later in the poem.  Which raises the question: Why is Virgil 
barred from heaven?  What has he done to deserve his excommunication?   It's very simple: He 
does not believe in the City of Heaven.  We have the same problem, whether it's with a world 
like Virgil's ruled by capricious gods, which are themselves ruled by chance, or whether it's with our world, ruled by capricious physical and biological imperatives.  It is very  hard to see in our 
surroundings or glean from our everyday experiences anything remotely like a just and loving 
God.  Essentially we do not believe in grace, and not believing in grace blocks grace.  But for 
Virgil, that is putting the effect before the cause.  Yet we must remember: There is no cause 
until the effect reveals it's hitherto hidden presence. 

82  “O de li altri poeti onore e lume,
83  vagliami 'l lungo studio e 'l grande amore
84  che m'ha fatto cercar lo tuo volume.

85  Tu se' lo mio maestro e 'l mio autore,
86  tu se' solo colui da cu' io tolsi
87  lo bello stilo che m'ha fatto onore.

88  Vedi la bestia per cu' io mi volsi;
89  aiutami da lei, famoso saggio,
90  ch'ella mi fa tremar le vene e i polsi.”
82  "O, of the other poets honour and light,
83  Avail me the long study and great love
84  That have impelled me to explore thy volume!
85  Thou art my master, and my author thou,
86  Thou art alone the one from whom I took
87  The beautiful style that has done honour to me.
88  Behold the beast, for which I have turned back;
89  Do thou protect me from her, famous Sage,
90  For she doth make my veins and pulses tremble."
Note the swift linkage from honor and light, experienced as something external,
to a return to the beast, and the internal, bodily experience of fear,
the very veins of the body trembling in their pulse.  The fear here is specifically tied
to the she-wolf, the hunger, want, and subsequent viciousness which Dante hopes
Virgil can help him overcome.  Virgil cannot do that, but he does tell Dante that the way Dante has chosen — that is, to know grace in the physical body — cannot go past this beast.  The 
poet's way is not this way.  Mortality destroys all the living, and the more it eats the thinner it 
becomes, so that physicality becomes like a drug which requires larger and larger doses to get 
less and less satisfaction.  Virgil takes time here to portray this futile ravenous hunger that 
drives the body, in order to show that the body politic mirrors this same natural process.  The 
she wolf first mating with all the animals, and then going from village to village to ravage 
humans.  Also note the contrast of these villages with the City of God mentioned later, a 
development of culture, and in this case, also a spiritual development, the arc climbing
upward from nomad group, to village, to beatific city.  This is more or less the opposite
of Rousseau, and also the Christian desert fathers, both of which saw the city as the 
essence of corruption, and sought a return to a simpler life.  This return to nature,
is not Dante's way.  Like Blake, he wants to transcend nature.      

91  “A te convien tenere altro vïaggio,”
92  rispuose, poi che lagrimar mi vide,
93 “se vuo' campar d'esto loco selvaggio;

94  ché questa bestia, per la qual tu gride,
95  non lascia altrui passar per la sua via,
96  ma tanto lo 'mpedisce che l'uccide;

97  e ha natura sì malvagia e ria,
98  che mai non empie la bramosa voglia,
99  e dopo 'l pasto ha più fame che pria.

100  Molti son li animali a cui s'ammoglia,
101  e più saranno ancora, infin che 'l veltro
102  verrà, che la farà morir con doglia.

103  Questi non ciberà terra né peltro,
104  ma sapïenza, amore e virtute,
105  e sua nazion sarà tra feltro e feltro.
91  "Thee it behoves to take another road,"
92  Responded he, when he beheld me weeping,
93  "If from this savage place thou wouldst escape;
94  Because this beast, at which thou criest out,
95  Suffers not any one to pass her way,
96  But so doth harass him, that she destroys him;
97  And has a nature so malign and ruthless,
98  That never doth she glut her greedy will,
99  And after food is hungrier than before.
100  Many the animals with whom she weds,
101  And more they shall be still, until the Greyhound
102  Comes, who shall make her perish in her pain.
103  He shall not feed on either earth or pelf,
104  But upon wisdom, and on love and virtue;
105  'Twixt Feltro and Feltro shall his nation be;
Some enigmatic passages here, in which the mythical, geographical, spiritual, and political 
merge in a powerful ambiguity.  This makes us want to read these tercets as symbol, not 
merely as sign.  The she wolf will go from village to village in Italy until a certain figure 
arises, represented by a Greyhound.  The Greyhound will destroy want and avarice, and drive 
them back to Hell — in other words the Greyhound will put a limit and a locale to pain.

Scholars have speculated what this passage means (lines 101 - 105), but to me,
it's just a series of images flashed into the brain, with the Greyhound being
a stronger but tamed and trained version of the she-wolf.  This hunting trope can
remind us that it is a life or death business not to just subdue our selfish and corral our fearful
passions, but we must also incorporate these instincts into our psyches.  In effect, we must 
train them, thus giving them the strength to pursue the spiritual path of peace.  

Line 105 — tra feltro e feltro — has puzzled readers for generations.  It has been
pointed out that feltro is part of two Italian place names, so that could be a region
in which political peace is sought.  Also, some have said that feltro is the past participle 
of the verb "to feel", so a physiological/psychological reference would be that peace is felt
from feeling to feeling, between feeling and feeling, yet maybe not in the feelings 
themselves, but in the aftermath of having felt them.

Note on line 103 (Questi non ciberà terra né peltro):  He (the savior, the saved) shall no
longer feed on dirt or pelf, which is kind of like a pica, the craving for non-nutritious 
foods and experience, eating hamburgers and fries until it kills us, polluting the air
for trinkets or for the abstraction of money, until it kills us, etc.  It's a striking image
built up here of this she wolf who attacks and kills everyone, and has the psychic
appearance of a desperately boney canine trying to fend off starvation by eating dirt
and skin.  

106  Di quella umile Italia fia salute
107  per cui morì la vergine Cammilla,
108  Eurialo e Turno e Niso di ferute.

109  Questi la caccerà per ogne villa,
110  fin che l'avrà rimessa ne lo 'nferno,
111  là onde 'nvidia prima dipartilla.
106  Of that low Italy shall he be the saviour,
107  On whose account the maid Camilla died,
108  Euryalus, Turnus, Nisus, of their wounds;
109  Through every city shall he hunt her down,
110  Until he shall have driven her back to Hell,
111  There from whence envy first did let her loose.
With the mention of Cammilla, a virgin warrior who died at the destruction of Troy, Dante
links the internecine wars in his Italy, to the mythic or historical destruction of Troy.  He
works throughout the whole of the Commedia to fold all these components together.
The cause of these dystopias is made clear in line 111 about the wave of envy.  But I think of
invidia as something more than what is usually meant by envy.  It's also an intense one-up-manship of nations wanting bigger armies, of men wanting more money and power, of
anyone feeling that life is a zero sum game of winners and losers, and in the end,
there can only be one winner.  The irony here is that this winner, like all the others he has 
defeated or tried to defeat, is, like them, claimed by death.

The next few lines are Virgil's preview of what Dante will experience if he, the
desperate aspirant, follows him.  It must be a choice, even a rational choice, but
once the foot touches the dragon path of the moving sidewalk, choice ends, as does
the hope of self-reliance.  Here, Virgil tells Dante just how far he can go before he has 
to turn Dante over to teachers who can complete, not his moral education, but his spiritual
one.     

112  Ond' io per lo tuo me' penso e discerno
113  che tu mi segui, e io sarò tua guida,
114  e trarrotti di qui per loco etterno;

115  (d) ove udirai le disperate strida,
116  vedrai li antichi spiriti dolenti,
117  ch'a la seconda morte ciascun grida;

118  e vederai color che son contenti
119  nel foco, perché speran di venire
120  quando che sia a le beate genti.

121  A le quai poi se tu vorrai salire,
122  anima fia a ciò più di me degna:
123  con lei ti lascerò nel mio partire;

124  ché quello imperador che là sù regna,
125  perch' i' fu' ribellante a la sua legge,
126  non vuol che 'n sua città per me si vegna.

127  In tutte parti impera e quivi regge;
128  quivi è la sua città e l'alto seggio:
129  oh felice colui cu' ivi elegge!”
112  Therefore I think and judge it for thy best
113  Thou follow me, and I will be thy guide,
114  And lead thee hence through the eternal place,
115  Where thou shalt hear the desperate lamentations,
116  Shalt see the ancient spirits disconsolate,
117  Who cry out each one for the second death;
118  And thou shalt see those who contented are
119  Within the fire, because they hope to come,
120  Whene'er it may be, to the blessed people;
121  To whom, then, if thou wishest to ascend,
122  A soul shall be for that than I more worthy;
123  With her at my departure I will leave thee;
124  Because that Emperor, who reigns above,
125  In that I was rebellious to his law,
126  Wills that through me none come into his city.
127  He governs everywhere, and there he reigns;
128  There is his city and his lofty throne;
129  O happy he whom thereto he elects!"
All this speech of Virgil begins with, Trust me, follow me, I know the way, and it ends
with Beyond this point I am not to be trusted or followed, and I cannot follow you.

There is a reference here to God on his throne in the midst of His Celestial city,
but Virgil, the earthly or earthy artist, cannot go there.  His whole rationale for
being and writing (and maybe this will become clearer, in a later Canto)
can only approach the boundary of this Other.  Virgil knows
that he can never know enough, and that somehow these "elect"
have, through an act of inconceivable (to him) grace, managed to surpass
what the ancients achieved through what they called "virtue", a kind
of developed set of masculine qualities admired by other men.

130  E io a lui: “Poeta, io ti richeggio
131  per quello Dio che tu non conoscesti,
132  a ciò ch'io fugga questo male e peggio,

133  che tu mi meni là dov' or dicesti,
134  sì ch'io veggia la porta di san Pietro
135  e color cui tu fai cotanto mesti.”

136  Allor si mosse, e io li tenni dietro.
130  And I to him: "Poet, I thee entreat,
131  By that same God whom thou didst never know,
132  So that I may escape this woe and worse,
133  Thou wouldst conduct me there where thou hast said,
134  That I may see the portal of Saint Peter,
135  And those thou makest so disconsolate."

136  Then he moved on, and I behind him followed.
These last lines of Canto I, the introduction, before entering Hell proper, are most
poignant because Dante the aspirant realizes that he is destined to go beyond
where his teacher can take him, and he prays to Virgil in the name of the God,
the spirit of grace, let us say, that Virgil does not know, and will be ever blind
to.  The aspirant aspires to reach "la porta di san Pietro," that is, Saint Peter's, i.e. the pearly 
gates, although the way lies through "those that you have made so disconsolate"  
(line 136, e color cui tu fai cotanto mesti.)  Dante the aspirant makes a huge
leap of faith here, he follows Virgil, humbly follows him, behind (dietro).  However, the 
next gate that Dante sees will not be the pearly one.

Canto II
Summary of Structure of Canto II, Inferno

Introduction: Space and Time
Atmosphere, Brown Air
Time: Good Friday Evening, April 8th, 1300; spring, in mythic terms: the beginning of the world

The animal nature going to sleep

First: Call 
Invocation to the Muses and Virgil for help
First Response
Dante's Enthusiasm followed by fear and paralysis
failure and delay
Virgil's admonishment and trope of an animal shying at shadows

Second Call
Beatrice to Virgil to help Dante
Tears. shining eyes metaphor
Second Response
Virgil's immediate response, success
Beginning of retrograde time

Third Call
Gentle Lady (Virgin Mary) to St. Lucy
Third response
St. Lucy's immediate response, success 

Fourth Call
St. Lucy to Beatrice (with Rachael)
Fourth Response
Beatrice's immediate response, success
shining eyes metaphor

Return to the First Call
(return to forward motion time)
Virgil to Dante
(Metaphor of frost blighted blossoms revived by the sun, foreshadowing of the frozen 
lake at the pit of Hell)
 
Response to Repeated First Call
Dante's immediate response, success

Descent into Hell Proper

Note: This "call and response" device mirrors the perfomance of the Catholic Mass.

Canto II is the prelude to the Inferno, as Canto I is the prelude to the entire Commedia.  This does not mean that it is some kind of summary, it's more like a preparation.  Dante, the pilgrim, 
the spiritual aspirant, cannot go forward if dragged back and down by fear or self-doubt.  When we intuit that we are going to start a great enterprise, the question arises: Why me?  How am even remotely qualified to do this?  How will I find the strength and the wisdom to answer my 
calling?  Like Canto I, Canto II also begins in darkness, as animals are relieved of their earthly 
fatigue by sleep.  Dante enters the darkness as a warrior, alone (among the living), but 
he does have spiritual guides.  We can say that the animal nature of man, the mortal man with 
his bodily, amoral, animal appetites, the three beasts that impede the aspirant in Canto I, are 
now going to sleep, released from the fatigue of pursuing earthly things (Darwinian fight for 
survival by mating and murdering).  But Dante, in a living body, not a dream body or spiritual 
body, moves forward.  We are reminded of Blake's vow: I will not cease from mental fight, nor 
shall my sword sleep in my hand, 'till we have built Jerusalem in England's green and sunny land.

There is an emphasis on Dante's physicality here, as opposed to the shades who have come to 
assist him, and Dante (the narrator, not Dante the pilgrim) even has to convince Virgil, or 
himself, that such is possible, because in the Aeneid, Virgil also has Aeneas descend to the 
nightmare land of shades  (As did Ulysses (Odysseus), while still in a living body.
Note: Dante never read Homer, but he knew of him by reputation, and so probably would have been aware that Virgil's verse concerning visiting the land of the dead was a recapitulation of
Odysseus' visit to the land of shades.  Pound also copied this theme in his Canto's.  It's a very 
old trope, it also appears in the Epic of Gilgamesh, the earliest piece of written literature that 
we have.  The descriptions all match closely: It's not a pleasant place.   

1  Lo giorno se n'andava, e l'aere bruno
2  toglieva li animai che sono in terra
3  da le fatiche loro; e io sol uno

4  m'apparecchiava a sostener la guerra
5  sì del cammino e sì de la pietate,
6  che ritrarrà la mente che non erra.
1  Day was departing, and the embrowned air
2  Released the animals that are on earth
3  From their fatigues; and I the only one
4  Made myself ready to sustain the war,
5  Both of the way and likewise of the woe,
6  Which memory that errs not shall retrace.
Poetry, like mortal life, relies on breath, the breath on atmosphere, so Dante is very concerned with the atmosphere of any given locale.  This is more than mood, it is the affectation of a certain pattern of breathing.  In Canto 2 of the Inferno, as night comes on in an air, not dark blue or black, but brown (e l'aere bruno), the beast self which is subject to mortal fatigue is stripped away.  The verb togliere is used here to describe what happens to the animals, it is poorly translated hear as released, but another more violent meaning is to strip away, fatigue stripped away, like a hunter skinning an animal, as if fatigue were a kind of pelt that protects the mortal from being attacked by the second death, mortal sleep, which will spirit the body and identity away into an unknown region.  Shakespeare: "Death's second self which seals up all in rest."  The insomnia theme comes back here with a very jarring image of the poet/pilgrim/aspirant girding up his loins to prepare for war.  What war?  The war of the downward way which unless one is militantly vigilant will strip away the memory of being a human spirit on a journey to unite with universal spirit.  The word mente is used (feminine here "la mente"), and I do not think this is the same as memoria, another translation problem.  Dante uses the word memoria in other contexts, so he is making a distinction that the translator doesn't.  Mente is mind, not a limited human mind, but mind at large, the conscious cosmos, or better, the cosmos of consciousness, whose operations out-picture what we perceive as the physical world, and make what we call material reality from what is tangible in the limited spectrum of our human senses.  It is fitting that from these lines, the next few follow, the classical invocation to the muses.
7  O Muse, o alto ingegno, or m'aiutate;
8  o mente che scrivesti ciò ch'io vidi,
9  qui si parrà la tua nobilitate.

7  O Muses, O high genius, now assist me!
8  O memory, that didst write down what I saw,
9  Here thy nobility shall be manifest!

We don't know who or what the Muse is, because it (she? he?) is the entire complicated background from which ideas, sensory experience, imagination, words, etc. arise, here, says the poet, 'your nobility will appear'.  We need to watch for the resonance of this word nobility, whose meaning has changed for us with the decline of a social aristocratic hierarchy.  But I think it is the feeling inside a person that says the universe, the Muse, has selected me to do great things, to paint the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel, to write King Lear or the Commedia, a feeling that is not so much tied to self-aggrandizement, getting conflated with the sin of pride, but a feeling of duty, or of performing a sacred vow, of becoming the sacrifice, and of giving up all your time and diversions and even your common filial relationships to accomplish a task, for which you deserve no credit, because that kind of credit would have to have been usurped by an isolated and false identity.  Dante, the pilgrim, not Dante the poet, is lost here, and he cries out next to the only guide he knows: Virgil.  But it should be noted that this is only a substitute kind of assistance, genuine succor can only come after the moral decks have been cleared so to speak, after the animal has been stripped of his fatigue and appetites, and the shadow of hell has been seen and purged.

10  Io cominciai: “Poeta che mi guidi,
11  guarda la mia virtù s'ell' è possente,
12  prima ch'a l'alto passo tu mi fidi.

13  Tu dici che di Silvïo il parente,
 14  corruttibile ancora, ad immortale
 15  secolo andò, e fu sensibilmente.

16  Però, se l'avversario d'ogne male
17  cortese i fu, pensando l'alto effetto
18  ch'uscir dovea di lui, e 'l chi e 'l quale

19  non pare indegno ad omo d'intelletto;
20  ch'e' fu de l'alma Roma e di suo impero
21  ne l'empireo ciel per padre eletto:

22  la quale e 'l quale, a voler dir lo vero,
23  fu stabilita per lo loco santo
24  u' siede il successor del maggior Piero.

10  And I began: "Poet, who guidest me,
11  Regard my manhood, if it be sufficient,
12  Ere to the arduous pass thou dost confide me.
13  Thou sayest, that of Silvius the parent,
14  While yet corruptible, unto the world
15  Immortal went, and was there bodily.
16  But if the adversary of all evil
17  Was courteous, thinking of the high effect
18  That issue would from him, and who, and what,
19  To men of intellect unmeet it seems not;
20  For he was of great Rome, and of her empire
21  In the empyreal heaven as father chosen;
22  The which and what, wishing to speak the truth,
23  Were stablished as the holy place, wherein
24  Sits the successor of the greatest Peter.
So much is packed into these few lines that it would take volumes to effectively gloss them.  Why Virgil? and Why me?  That seems to be the gist.  Here Dante the aspirant is not only asking Virgil is he, Dante, is going to have sufficient strength (specifically virtù and possente, something like masculine attributes and puissance, an echo of the militancy alluded to in line 4) to carry out this task, this quest.  He is also telling Virgil what Virgil's qualifications are for assisting him.  The first is that Virgil (through his Aeneas' persona) went to the land of the dead while still in his mortal body, and the more interesting reasons are things that Virgil can know nothing about, because they were events in his future, which to him is a blank.  Specifically, Aeneas' offspring, Silvius, founded a line which founded Rome, and this is important because Rome becomes the Holy Seat of Saint Peter, Vicar of Christ.  Why should we care about that?  Because what Dante is really saying in these few lines is what he is saying with the whole Commedia:  namely, these lineages which are the sexual evolution, through sequential time, of the violent, fearful secular, become a center of sacred peace.  Not just the peace that is the calm absence of conflict, but the peace that is a source of radiance.  In Zen parlance, and viewing time as a simultaneity, not just a sequence: Samsara is Nirvana.  
Robert Louis Stevenson wrote a story in which a criminal act leads to a series of events which creates a more than compensatory good, and a good act, leads to events productive of a vast evil.  That seems to be what is being stated here.  Only the Adversary of all evil has the courtesy to see time not as a line, but as a sphere, a kind of ball of string which is composed of effects indistinguishable from causes.  
Then there is this, for us moderns, curious word courtesy.  I don't think this just means courtliness, or refinement, but something like a nose for the subtle perfume of the good wafting through the stench of corruption.  We think courtesy means being polite, but that is a terribly inadequate definition.  It's a word Chaucer uses a lot to mean something like what I've stated here, so I tip my metaphorical hat to him for helping me through that particular kink in the maze.
I would also say that visiting the realm of the dead shows us the effect of the past, as living is the effect of the present, and this is the only way to gain the perspective to see past, present, and future as false divisions.  If you were spirit, as we shall learn, the passage back to mortal life is impossible, or only possible in unique sorts of circumstances, you must examine spirit from the perspective of mortal life, or mortal life is simply a severed ganglion cut off from the creative processes of the cosmos.   The next few lines make this clearer, Virgil's work, held to be prophetic of Christ's birth, could only be possible as prophesy, not history, by virtue of this visitation to the land of the dead. 
25  Per quest' andata onde li dai tu vanto,
26  intese cose che furon cagione
27  di sua vittoria e del papale ammanto.

28  Andovvi poi lo Vas d'elezïone,
29  per recarne conforto a quella fede
30  ch'è principio a la via di salvazione.
25  Upon this journey, whence thou givest him vaunt,
26  Things did he hear, which the occasion were
27  Both of his victory and the papal mantle.
28  Thither went afterwards the Chosen Vessel,
29  To bring back comfort thence unto that Faith,
30  Which of salvation's way is the beginning.
Again, density on density, the very essence of poetic speech.  The translation here is just horrible, but to be fair, even the Italian is pretty difficult and compact.  The word onde means wave in modern Italian, although it means place here, so there is a hint here of a wave of time, taking a journey which is motivated by pride (vanto) to a place where it is possible to hear things that will lead to the victory of a papal mantle — the covering, or if you prefer, the adornment of the Chosen Vessel.  The rhyme of elezïone and salvazione knit together the idea of grace (unmerited election) and salvation (also unmerited election).  The little prideful self will always choose the way of moral inversion and perversion, while the big Jungian Self weaves the actions of mortal humans into the grander designs of what we have come to call destiny.
31  Ma io, perché venirvi? o chi 'l concede?
32  Io non Enëa, io non Paulo sono;
33  me degno a ciò né io né altri 'l crede.

34  Per che, se del venire io m'abbandono,
35  temo che la venuta non sia folle.
36  Se' savio; intendi me' ch'i' non ragiono.”

37  E qual è quei che disvuol ciò che volle
38  e per novi pensier cangia proposta,
39  sì che dal cominciar tutto si tolle,

40  tal mi fec' ïo 'n quella oscura costa,
41  perché, pensando, consumai la 'mpresa
42  che fu nel cominciar cotanto tosta.

31  But I, why thither come, or who concedes it?
32  I not Aeneas am, I am not Paul,
33  Nor I, nor others, think me worthy of it.
34  Therefore, if I resign myself to come,
35  I fear the coming may be ill-advised;
36  Thou'rt wise, and knowest better than I speak."
37  And as he is, who unwills what he willed,
38  And by new thoughts doth his intention change,
39  So that from his design he quite withdraws,
40  Such I became, upon that dark hillside,
41  Because, in thinking, I consumed the emprise,
42  Which was so very prompt in the beginning.
Lines 31 -42 are all a long quivering of equivocation.  A stroke of insight floods our consciousness with light, but it is only like a flash of lightning that illuminates everything, and then goes dark again.  Did we really see the whole work spread out before us in perfect clarity?  Are we really the one to shout to those who did not see that there is a world out there, a world of light, and forms of light, and there are unimaginable entities, trees, houses, cities, forests, and other people, people who see, people who take the light for granted?  Are we really going to claim that some special flash of fire from the darkness was meant for us alone, and that what ever that fire brought to light, it is now our task to illuminate it with words?  Dante, the aspirant, throws heavy shadows on his own first burst of enthusiasm, sees the monumentality of the quest, and shrinks back into the nebulosity which had wafted him into this very state of hopeless confusion.  He turns to Virgil for help.  And Virgil's help?  First to admonish, and then to inform.
There is also another way to read this, and that is that Dante the poet establishes his authority though humility, that is to say, by admitting his weakness.  He's no braggart Odysseus or Oedipus, this reading would echo the reading in Canto I of ascending by keeping the firm foot lowest.  The two readings may seem in conflict, but there is a difference in being paralyzed by a feeling of inadequacy and moving forward with humility.  At the end of this Canto, we see that Dante the pilgrim chooses the later. 
There is a little circle here in Virgil's reply to Dante, that mirrors what Dante says in line 6 of this Canto, namely, che ritrarrà la mente che non erra, that he now has to repeat that which has no error.   This is not the same as memory, per se, recounting and experience "without" error.  No, it is a recapitulation of the actual "error free" state of a spiritual experience so that it revivifies the spiritual experience.  In the spirit, there cannot be a before experience or an after experience, there is just this experience, all-encompassing and timeless.   That is Dante's poetic task in the whole Commedia, and that is also Virgil's task now in recounting to Dante how the intercession of Beatrice has brought him to help Dante.  Virgil must also be in this error-free state imparted to him by a series of down-shifts in love-power, from the transpersonal dynamo of the Virgin Mary, through Saint Lucy (a martyr who was blinded, and whose vision is therefore of spiritual not physical or temporal things.  Her name means light, and the light that we see by cannot see itself) and then through Beatrice, Dante's personal spiritual (not carnal) lover.  This is the closest Virgil can come to grace, his service's payment is to be praised to God, something that Virgil cannot understand.  He can only understand quid pro quo, or magnanimity (a virtue that Dante praises him for having), and not grace.  But what does motivate Virgil is his need to respond to a good and beautiful (line 53: beata e bella) lady, who comes for Dante's grace, not his own.
Note: Mary means sea.  Lucia, light.  Beatrice, blessedness, and the fact the Beatrice is with Rachael, who was associated with the contemplative life, shows one way that Beatrice is blessed, i.e., through spiritual contemplation, and as we shall see later, through praising.  

43  “S'i' ho ben la parola tua intesa,”
44  rispuose del magnanimo quell' ombra,
45   “l'anima tua è da viltade offesa;

46  la qual molte fïate l'omo ingombra
47  sì che d'onrata impresa lo rivolve,
48  come falso veder bestia quand' ombra.

49  Da questa tema a ciò che tu ti solve,
50  dirotti perch' io venni e quel ch'io 'ntesi
51  nel primo punto che di te mi dolve.

52  Io era tra color che son sospesi,
53  e donna mi chiamò beata e bella,
54  tal che di comandare io la richiesi.

55  Lucevan li occhi suoi più che la stella;
56  e cominciommi a dir soave e piana,
57  con angelica voce, in sua favella:

43  "If I have well thy language understood,"
44  Replied that shade of the Magnanimous,
45  "Thy soul attainted is with cowardice,
46  Which many times a man encumbers so,
47  It turns him back from honoured enterprise,
48  As false sight doth a beast, when he is shy.
49  That thou mayst free thee from this apprehension,
50  I'll tell thee why I came, and what I heard
51  At the first moment when I grieved for thee.
52  Among those was I who are in suspense,
53  And a fair, saintly Lady called to me
54  In such wise, I besought her to command me.
55  Her eyes where shining brighter than the Star;
56  And she began to say, gentle and low,
57  With voice angelical, in her own language:
Some specific thoughts about these lines.  Line 45 - 48: That Dante's soul is still tainted with that fear that makes it jump at shadows.  Anyone who has ridden a recalcitrant horse, knows what this means, when they shy and jump sideways because of some movement that frightens them.  These are peripheral events, as prey animals like the horse have eyes on the sides of their heads, so that they cannot be ambused from behind or the side, they are eyes trained to slight movements, shadows, when these shadows twitch, the animal cannot go forwards but jumps sideways or back.  This is Dante's state, he loses focus in an instant from going forward, to jumping back, and this image Virgil compares to that of a frightened animal.  More brilliant and ironic poetics here in that the word ombra (shadow, shade) is used both to describe Virgil and also the shadow that frightens, and both of these ombra's are rhymed with ingombra, which means cluttered, or encumbered, and also, in one of its synonyms to be strangled or suffocated.  Everything in Dante's poem fits together and overlaps, and the overlapping intensifies the meanings.  A shadow that frightens, a shadow that guides, a human spirit's doubts, and the reaction of a terrified animal — and I've only touched the surface of the repercussive depths of what even one word or one line reveals.  Line 48 ends Virgil's admonition, then he begins to inform Dante's understanding of why he has come and how he began to be aware of Dante and to grieve for him.
One other note of interest here pertains to line 55, which says that the Lady's eyes are brighter than the star (star singular, not plural).  Not an empty tired simile, but a signal to Virgil that this interlocutor is from Heaven, not earth, and certainly not Hell.  The star is a guiding star, like the star that led the wise men to the manger of Jesus. 
There is an echo contrasting the weakness of Virgil's voice in Canto I, and Beatrice's voice here.  Beatrice speaks sweetly and softly (soave e piana)  Dante the poet is very concerned about how people speak and not just what they are saying.  Beatrice's voice is sweet and soft, which reminds me of Yeats' in his poem Hound Voice:
Because we love bare hills and stunted trees
And were the last to choose the settled ground,
Its boredom of the desk or of the spade, because
So many years companioned by a hound,
Our voices carry; and though slumber-bound,
Some few half wake and half renew their choice,
Give tongue, proclaim their hidden name — 'Hound Voice.'

The women that I picked spoke sweet and low
And yet gave tongue.  'Hound Voices' were they all ...

Language note: For Virgil the word angelica could not have meant what we mean, because, for one thing, he would not have been aware of its meaning in Christian terms.  The word itself is very old, and predates Christianity.  Here, it's is more likely to mean simply messenger.  I think this heavy Christianization of language, which is in fact, Dante's medium, does keep contemporary readers from understanding the much more stark and powerful message of the Commedia.  My reading of Dante gets more relevant to me, anyway, when I work to reinterpret what Dante is saying in a mental idiom (as distinct from a solely linguistic one) that has more of the thrust and power of the original than Christian glosses impart to it.  The placement of this word in Virgil's mouth could also just be a mistake of Dante's, a little fabric grin wherein we see Dante the poet behind the curtain, as the mouthpiece for everyone.  But Dante doesn't make many mistakes — if any — what he does is usually on purpose, so if a puzzle like this crops up, it's better to dig deeper into the poem's intentions and not just assume that you're catching Dante in something slipshod.  Even those parts of the poem which seem like rather tortured constructions usually have some organic purpose to fulfill, and their tortured-ness will be found to be ingeniously apropos. 

58  'O anima cortese mantoana,
59  di cui la fama ancor nel mondo dura,
60  e durerà quanto 'l mondo lontana,

61  l'amico mio, e non de la ventura,
62  ne la diserta piaggia è impedito
63  sì nel cammin, che vòlt' è per paura;

64  e temo che non sia già sì smarrito,
65  ch'io mi sia tardi al soccorso levata,
66  per quel ch'i' ho di lui nel cielo udito.

67  Or movi, e con la tua parola ornata
68  e con ciò c'ha mestieri al suo campare,
69  l'aiuta sì ch'i' ne sia consolata.

70  I' son Beatrice che ti faccio andare;
71  vegno del loco ove tornar disio;
72  amor mi mosse, che mi fa parlare.

73  Quando sarò dinanzi al segnor mio,
74  di te mi loderò sovente a lui.'
75  Tacette allora, e poi comincia' io:
58  'O spirit courteous of Mantua,
59  Of whom the fame still in the world endures,
60  And shall endure, long-lasting as the world;
61  A friend of mine, and not the friend of fortune,
62  Upon the desert slope is so impeded
63  Upon his way, that he has turned through terror,
64  And may, I fear, already be so lost,
65  That I too late have risen to his succour,
66  From that which I have heard of him in Heaven.
67  Bestir thee now, and with thy speech ornate,
68  And with what needful is for his release,
69  Assist him so, that I may be consoled.
70  Beatrice am I, who do bid thee go;
71  I come from there, where I would fain return;
72  Love moved me, which compelleth me to speak.
73  When I shall be in presence of my Lord,
74  Full often will I praise thee unto him.'
75  Then paused she, and thereafter I began:
These lines (58 - 75) in which Virgil recounts to Dante, the aspirant, how he came to be called to help him, as soon as one begins to think about them, imply a rather shocking view of the relationship between hell and paradise.  Note the following points.
1) That the blessed retain their individual identities (line 70: I am Beatrice, l' son Beatrice).
2) That the blessed can feel grief for the living (line 69: Assist him so that I may be consoled, l'aiuta sì ch'i' ne sia consolata)
3) That even in paradise, knowledge of those in hell and of the living is incomplete, uncertain, and can still be subject to doubt and rumor  (lines 66 - from that which I have heard of him in heaven, per quel ch'i' ho di lui nel cielo udito.)
4)  That the blessed can share the feelings of the living.  Dante is losing his way through fear and Beatrice is likewise afraid.  Is there a difference in the fear of Dante denoted by the Italian phrase avere paura, and the fear of Beatrice, expressed in the word temo?  Is Dante's fear, fear for self, and Beatrice's fear for others?
5)  That those in hell may still assist those in heaven.  Which in some sense implies that the damned may possess powers and capabilities which the blessed do not.  And do those capabilities involve something like an Orphean power of poetic enchantment?  (line 67, the reference to Virgil's parola ornata, ornate speech, which is specifically what Dante needs for his release.  Apparently this power exceeds even the power of the prayers of the blessed.  Really!  What an extraordinary claim, or in this case acquiescence of the blessed to one of the damned, and the implication that the poetic power is a kind of magic that prevails in all possible worlds — in Hell, among the living, and even among the blessed.  This jaw-dropping claim for poetry may go back to Genesis, wherein God's power to create is specifically tied to a speech act: And God said ... etc.
6)  That even the blessed can make mistakes, be in doubt, have negative feelings, etc.  (Passim).
7)  That Hell is not normally a locale that is accessible to the blessed, and that they can feel uncomfortable there, and that the only ticket of passage in or out of Hell is love. (lines 71, 72).  Love compels the lover to abandon Heaven for Hell, and more crucially, it compels us to speak.  This power of love via speech is also exactly the power that Beatrice is using to convince Virgil to come to Dante's aid.  
8)  That fame (line 59) is the coin of the realm on earth, and praise (line 74) that of heaven. (We shall have to keep that word fame, fama, in mind.  We moderns interpret it as celebrity, but I think it means something like a psychic resonance which connects, in this case, writer and readers, fame being something like a transpersonal artery that connects two hearts with the same feeling, via, in Virgil's and Dante's case, that poetic power already alluded to.  In this sense, Virgil, though in Hell, is still connected to both those living in material bodies on earth and those in spiritual bodies in Paradise.
9)  That fortune (line 61) can afflict the living, in spite of the favor that they have from the blessed.  Another extraordinary claim.  Chance still seems to be either a shadowy attribute of God, or a God herself who out gods God.
Essentially all of these tropes are about relationships: the connections and the sharing of resources in a circulatory system that is transpersonal: like language.  This canto is about shared language, and more than 80% of it is devoted to dialog, only Canto XI in the inferno has more.  Dialog, of course, is not just between persons — inside each person, there are many voices, and whether these voices conflict or cooperate determines whether we are mad or sane.
None of this of course will mean anything to modern readers who do not share Dante's Christian worldview, and do not believe in the entire construct of the three worlds of spirit either arising from the imaginations of the living, or giving shape to the living's imagination.  Who are these blessed, these damned, these repentant?  If we are going to read Dante as anything more than a fable, we have to assess what validity if any this conceit of the many worlds still has for us.  A transference of these spiritual states to the realm of psyche, of soul, can give us a psychological interpretation that moderns will have no trouble seeing as relevant to their own life experience.  We know through our emotions whether we are in a hell state, a purgatorial state, a limbo or suspended state, or a beautiful state, so in that sense Dante's work is still quite relevant, although it's symbols are outmoded, and should be updated to those of the DSM - 5) (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders).  I think this is woefully inadequate.  Hint: the old Cabbalistic idea of the Ain Soph, the old physicists' idea of the ether, and the idea of Numa, or universal mind.  Essentially we are talking about the attributes of the Universe that makes a cosmos out of chaos, and a chaos from a cosmos.  These are the biggest most impersonal questions, and also the most personal and intimate ones.  What the Commedia is is a map for negotiating a path from fear, exclusion, punishment, and death to an individual's total immersion in light as light.  But this map is not just a map, there is also somehow a kind of entanglement in the very processes that birthed and evolve the universe.  
Why I'm using Dante's work as a map for my own spiritual evolution is because I know of no other writer or no other work of any kind which traces this journey so thoroughly as does the Commedia.  Dante's map is so conflated with these elemental processes that it has transcended the quality of mere map, and has become the territory.  And as usual, the devil, and the angels are in the details, and this is where Dante excels.  He is a master at amassing detail none of which in any least tittle of minutia are superfluous to his vision of the whole.  That's why I am taking such pains to examine these details of the text: because there is no aspect of the work, however seemingly inconsequential, or boring, or obscure, or informational that does not serve as a portal to a realm whose features would otherwise be inaccessible and unimaginable.
76  'O donna di virtù sola per cui
77  l'umana spezie eccede ogne contento
78  di quel ciel c'ha minor li cerchi sui,
79  tanto m'aggrada il tuo comandamento,
80  che l'ubidir, se già fosse, m'è tardi;
81  più non t'è uo' ch'aprirmi il tuo talento.

82  Ma dimmi la cagion che non ti guardi
83  lo scender qua giuso in questo centro
84  de l'ampio loco ove tornar tu ardi.'
76  'O Lady of virtue, thou alone through whom
77  The human race exceedeth all contained
78  Within the heaven that has the lesser circles,
79  So grateful unto me is thy commandment,
80  To obey, if 'twere already done, were late;
81  No farther need'st thou ope to me thy wish.
82  But the cause tell me why thou dost not shun
83  The here descending down into this centre,
84  From the vast place thou burnest to return to.'
The first thing we notice about this is that Virgil, unlike Dante, the pilgrim, does not shrink in fear from the great task he is given, but immediately undertakes to do it, and his very presence with Dante shows that indeed he has already pulled Dante back from the brink.  Virgil's and Beatrice's will are one. (Lines 79 - 81).  He is grateful to be able to answer this call of spirit.    
In line 76, again the word virtue, but what's different perhaps is that this is a virtue inherent in the blessed which causes them to exceed every human being who does not possess it.
Note: line 76, the lesser circle is Earth, below the circle of the moon (luna, lunacy).  Earth is dominated by fortune, caprice, chance, and Beatrice says in line 61  that Dante is her friend, the friend of blessedness, but not the friend of fortune.  In spiritual things, or artistic, or poetic, if you prefer, Dante is blessed, in Earthly, i.e., what we would call practical things, unlucky.
Then, in lines 82 - 84, Virgil, noticing the Beatrice is burning (ardi) to return to heaven (even the blessed, it seems, suffer when in hell), asks why she doesn't shun this place.  The center that he is alluding to here is Hell, which is in the core of Earth, and is farthest from God.  The answer that Beatrice gives him in the lines that follow establishes two things.  The first is none of miseries of hell can ordinarily touch the blessed, their only fear is the fear of that which has the power to do others harm (lines 88 - 89).  She has received grace (line 91), and cannot be touched by the sufferings of the soul's in hell.  And the second is, that her intervention is a unique dispensation, granted by "a gentle lady in Heaven" (line 94 — and there is that word gentle again), to break the law of separation between heaven and hell.  Dante in his poem will do what God has presumably done only twice: one, when he became incarnate in Jesus as the Christ, and two, when through the Virgin, he sent Beatrice to Virgil to save Dante.  Dante the pilgrim might falter again and again, but this passage tells us that Dante the poet is ordained to recapitulate a spiritual journey, without error.  Now that is confidence!
85  Da che tu vuo' saver cotanto a dentro,
86  dirotti brievemente,' mi rispuose,
87  'perch' i' non temo di venir qua entro.

88  Temer si dee di sole quelle cose
89  c'hanno potenza di fare altrui male;
90  de l'altre no, ché non son paurose.

91  I' son fatta da Dio, sua mercé, tale,
92  che la vostra miseria non mi tange,
93  né fiamma d'esto 'ncendio non m'assale.

94  Donna è gentil nel ciel che si compiange
95  di questo 'mpedimento ov' io ti mando,
96  sì che duro giudicio là sù frange.
85  'Since thou wouldst fain so inwardly discern,
86  Briefly will I relate,' she answered me,
87  'Why I am not afraid to enter here.
88  Of those things only should one be afraid
89  Which have the power of doing others harm;
90  Of the rest, no; because they are not fearful.
91  God in his mercy such created me
92  That misery of yours attains me not,
93  Nor any flame assails me of this burning.
94  A gentle Lady is in Heaven, who grieves
95  At this impediment, to which I send thee,
96  So that stern judgment there above is broken.
This recapitulation of Beatrice's speech is an example of Virgil repeating "without error" what transpired between them.  There is a bit of irony here which shows Virgil's limitations.  In line 84, he says after he notices Beatrice's discomfort, that she is burning to return to where she came from (the word used is ardi, which means "you burn"), but she assures him in line 93 that no flame can incinerate her, nothing of the miseries of hell can touch her.  Why?  It's the way she had been made.  She said before that she was moved by love, and here she says "a gentle lady in heaven grieves for this impediment."  (There's that word "gentle" again.)  This gentle lady apparently has sent Beatrice, just as she is now sending Virgil, each step of transfer, operating with less and less spiritual power, since the gentle lady has been assumed by commentators to be the Virgin Mary (Mary means "sea", in this case a sea of compassion.)  Very Catholic here, as Mary, or in this case her proxy, is assumed to be the intercessor between human degradation and divine perfection.  If Beatrice is moved by love, Mary seems moved by mercy, that these ideas are linked seems obvious enough, but the irony is that Dante is about to enter Hell proper where whenever he feels or tries to show mercy or compassion to the damned, he is admonished by Virgil.  The damned are not worthy of pity or mercy — a weird thought.  Apparently, for those in a state of bliss, suffering is anathema, and they are "made" impervious to both suffering and suffers.  Another translation issue in line 96 when dura, hard, is translated as stern.  This misses all the play on the word dura or its variations which has already been happening in the first two cantos.  Plus it misses the contrast in the line where "hard" judgement, is in the last word "frangible", so God's judgement here is depicted as something brittle and breakable like glass.
97  Questa chiese Lucia in suo dimando
98  e disse: «Or ha bisogno il tuo fedele
99 di te, e io a te lo raccomando.»

100  Lucia, nimica di ciascun crudele,
101  si mosse, e venne al loco dov' i' era,
102  che mi sedea con l'antica Rachele.

103  Disse: «Beatrice, loda di Dio vera,
104  ché non soccorri quei che t'amò tanto,
105  ch'uscì per te de la volgare schiera?

106  Non odi tu la pieta del suo pianto,
107  non vedi tu la morte che 'l combatte
108  su la fiumana ove 'l mar non ha vanto?»

109  Al mondo non fur mai persone ratte
110  a far lor pro o a fuggir lor danno,
111  com' io, dopo cotai parole fatte,

112  venni qua giù del mio beato scanno,
113  fidandomi del tuo parlare onesto,
114  ch'onora te e quei ch'udito l'hanno.'
97  In her entreaty she besought Lucia,
98  And said, "Thy faithful one now stands in need
99  Of thee, and unto thee I recommend him."
100  Lucia, foe of all that cruel is,
101  Hastened away, and came unto the place
102  Where I was sitting with the ancient Rachel.
103  "Beatrice" said she, "the true praise of God,
104  Why succourest thou not him, who loved thee so,
105  For thee he issued from the vulgar herd?
106  Dost thou not hear the pity of his plaint?
107  Dost thou not see the death that combats him
108  Beside that flood, where ocean has no vaunt?"
109  Never were persons in the world so swift
110  To work their weal and to escape their woe,
111  As I, after such words as these were uttered,
112  Came hither downward from my blessed seat,
113  Confiding in thy dignified discourse,
114  Which honours thee, and those who've listened to it.'
All of these lines can be summarized in the structure outline with which I began the notes for this chapter.  There is the retrograde time motion, going back from Virgil and Dante's point in the "present" of the poem, to where The Virgin Mary becomes aware of Dante's situation, then forward through St. Lucy and then to Beatrice, and then to Virgil, and finally pack to the present tense.  It's also crucial to notice that there is a continuing diminution of spiritual power in each iteration of the message transfer.  If this power were electricity, the power plant would be the Virgin Mary, and then on to a substation of St. Lucy, and then a further substation of Beatrice, and finally to the place, where an appliance, in this case Virgil, delivers that power to Dante, the pilgrim/aspirant.  It is almost as if what Dante the poet is telling us here is that his little 25 watt bulb would be burned out if all the spiritual power of the Virgin were channeled directly into it.  Which in fact is what happens at the end of the Paradisio.  
It should also be noted that the shining eye metaphor is used to frame the whole sequence describing the heavenly intercessions, and that this is related to the star which heralded Christ's birth — the ultimate source of compassion and grace.
A similar framing device occurs with the word vanto (vaunt), occurring first in line 25, and then reoccurring in line 108.  An obscure reference here, much debated be commentators throughout the centuries.  It may be that the ove, (where), really should be onde (wave, or place), and if it were, the two lines would match perfectly.  In the first instance Virgil's tale of Aeneas is described as a vaunt, a sort of boastful celebration of his hero's exploits.  In the second instance, it is a description of a river over which the ocean has no boast, i.e., no power.  The river then would be the river Jorden, which does not drain into the ocean, but into the Dead Sea.  This also points to the contrast of pagan virtue, pride, and Christian virtue, humility.   Vaunt is a weird word,  but if another easier word were chosen, it probably would not be read as a framing device.  Another example of Dante's near miraculous powers as a poet, once again with the utmost efficiency using each word to intensify his meaning.
Hearing and seeing: lines 106, and 107.  To hear, to see, that is the order of poetic inspiration, first we hear the words, and then we see the image that they are conveying.  To hear and to see is also to obey, to act in obedience to one's inspiration, one's personal divine command.  Julian Jaynes' discussion of this in his book The Origins of Consciousness and the Breakdown of the Bi-Cameral Mind is quite illuminating here.  He talks about the 'authority of sound' and 'the control of obedience.'  On one side of the brain we hear, on the other we hallucinate a meaning.  Jaynes says that in the preconscious mind this linking of brain hemispheres is synonymous with volition.  It is not like volition, it is volition.  The pertinent etymology from the Latin being ob + audire, or to hear while facing someone.  What someone?  The authority: your irresistible God.  If the God is face to face with you and close, his/her speech unites your will to the divine will.  Which is precisely what happens here at end of this Canto (line 139, below) when one will is forged from two.
Language note: vulgar, line 105.  The etymology of the word is from Latin, meaning to throng, to crowd, and finally to participate in that which is common, now used in the pejorative sense of both common and disreputable, the opposite of what is praiseworthy, and praise is something specifically referred to in the first line of this tercet, when Beatrice is referred to as the "true praise of God".  (badly translated, since the adjective true is attached to God, not praise, so a better rendering would be: praise of the true God).  It would be interesting to track the body and brain chemistry of giving praise in contrast to that of condemnation.  At any rate, it's clear that one of the reasons that Dante is singled out for special treatment is that he has escaped the vulgar herd.  As in Proust, who first saw Albertine among a group of girls, Dante also first sees Beatrice, as he says in La Vita Nuova, among a group of ladies.  She is special, because she praises God, and Dante is special because he praises her.  He is singled out, alone, as is pointed out at the beginning of this Canto, line 3, to fight the war both of the way (the path he's on), and of the woe.  When you take a road that is not common, you can be sure that society will have an immune system response to reject, belittle you, or ignore you, and you will feel the danger and stress of that, since human primates seem to be clan or troop animals, and exile generally means death for the individual (hence the war metaphor in line 4).  Dante of course was in exile through the whole second half of his life, and certainly felt the sting of that.  There is some irony in the fact that Dante has chosen to write his masterpiece in the vulgar tongue, and in his book, De Vulgari Eloquentia, he defends that choice, partly with the odd excuse that it is one's first language, learned naturally, the mother tongue, whereas the Latin, or any subsequently learned second language must be acquired through difficult and long study.  The kind of language that is praised by Beatrice in this passage is that of Virgil — honest, it is that which brings honor to him (praise) and which presumably also fills the reader or listener of such language with those noble characteristics.  It is also a durable tongue, hard to understand, and imperishable through fame.
115  Poscia che m'ebbe ragionato questo,
116  li occhi lucenti lagrimando volse,
117 per che mi fece del venir più presto.
115  After she thus had spoken unto me,
116  Weeping, her shining eyes she turned away;
117  Whereby she made me swifter in my coming;
Three points to be made about these 3 lines (115 - 117).  
1) Line 115 is translated badly, it would be better translated as "After she had reasoned with me thusly," because Virgil responds to reason, not the grace of what we would now call inspiration.
2) Beatrice's discourse is closed as it was opened, with shining eyes.
3) Virgil reiterates the call and response sequence, and shows in his own behavior that immediate response is what is called for, his will one with Beatrice's just as at the end of this Canto, his will and Dante's will are one.  This is obedience, which was discussed above, and is verified by Virgil in the next lines:
118  E venni a te così com' ella volse:
119  d'inanzi a quella fiera ti levai
120  che del bel monte il corto andar ti tolse.

118  And unto thee I came, as she desired;
119  I have delivered thee from that wild beast,
120  Which barred the beautiful mountain's short ascent.

Next comes the formal closing of Virgil's argument, and a reiteration of the admonition at the beginning of this Canto (lines 43 -48), wherein Virgil compares Dante to a beast which shies at shadows — and remember the first lines of this Canto specifically state that it's the time when the beasts, and by association, the bestial (undeveloped, ignoble) part of Dante, have no place if the journey is to be undertaken, the poem written.  Line 120 also recapitulates the subject of the short ascent, that which is available to all those whom I have called the orthodox, those who believe without question, and are untroubled by reason's balking at superstition.  That way is not available to Dante, he's already swallowed the pill of reasonable doubt, and now must go the whole hog, tour hell, and then purge himself through purgatory.  Dante's path is

Transgression
Punishment
Purgation.

Then finally, blessedness. 

but those who never transgressed can skip the first three steps, and simply refine their original innocence.

121  Dunque: che è? perché, perché restai,
122  perché tanta viltà nel core allette,
123  perché ardire e franchezza non hai,

124  poscia che tai tre donne benedette
125  curan di te ne la corte del cielo,
126  e 'l mio parlar tanto ben ti promette?”

121  What is it, then? Why, why dost thou delay?
122  Why is such baseness bedded in thy heart?
123  Daring and hardihood why hast thou not,

124  Seeing that three such Ladies benedight
125  Are caring for thee in the court of Heaven,
126  And so much good my speech doth promise thee?"

These tercets reecho what has already been stated, with the litany of perché, perché, perché, perché — why, why, why, why.  Line 122 in which the word allette (embedded) appears as a metaphor of baseness in the heart, echoes line 20, in Canto one, where the heart is a lake which has been quieted.  We must watch for this system of metaphors, in this case those having to do with water, which is elaborated throughout the work.  We are at the bottom, the depths of the heart, but it is the sleeping heart again, with which the work began.  There is also a poetic church bell ringing here with the cor-sounds: in line 120, corto (short), line 122, core (heart), and corte (court, as in the court of heaven).

Note: the characteristics that the pilgrim needs to succeed in his quest (line 123) ardire (courage) and franchezza (candor).  

127  Quali fioretti dal notturno gelo
128  chinati e chiusi, poi che 'l sol li 'mbianca,
129  si drizzan tutti aperti in loro stelo,

130  tal mi fec' io di mia virtude stanca,
131  e tanto buono ardire al cor mi corse,
132  ch'i' cominciai come persona franca:

133  “Oh pietosa colei che mi soccorse!
134  e te cortese ch'ubidisti tosto
135  a le vere parole che ti porse!

136  Tu m'hai con disiderio il cor disposto
137  sì al venir con le parole tue,
138  ch'i' son tornato nel primo proposto.

139  Or va, ch'un sol volere è d'ambedue:
140  tu duca, tu segnore e tu maestro.”
141  Così li dissi; e poi che mosso fue,

142  intrai per lo cammino alto e silvestro.

127  Even as the flowerets, by nocturnal chill,
128  Bowed down and closed, when the sun whitens them,
129  Uplift themselves all open on their stems;

130  Such I became with my exhausted strength,
131  And such good courage to my heart there coursed,
132  That I began, like an intrepid person:

133  "O she compassionate, who succoured me,
134  And courteous thou, who hast obeyed so soon
135  The words of truth which she addressed to thee!

136  Thou hast my heart so with desire disposed
137  To the adventure, with these words of thine,
138  That to my first intent I have returned.

139  Now go, for one sole will is in us both,
140  Thou Leader, and thou Lord, and Master thou."
141  Thus said I to him; and when he had moved,

142  I entered on the deep and savage way.

The incredible symmetry of Canto II comes to a conclusion here as the completion of the call and response structure that has characterized this entire section.  Dante after hearing Virgil's discourse, and realizing that it is not Dante's confused and fearful self which is being called to undertake this journey — not solely for his own salvation as we already know from the lines 7 - 9 of Canto I, but to tell of the good he saw — and now Dante knows exactly who his Muses are: these forces or beings whose help he implored in lines  7 - 9 of this Canto.  This is at bottom a claim for poetry, which with courage and candor has the power to redeem not only Dante, but his readers.

The symmetry is shown also in two natural metaphors.  The first comes when Virgil compares Dante's cowardice to that of a beast which shies at shadows, and the bookend to that metaphor is this trope of the young flowers, blighted by night frost, but reified by the sun.
A flower is a lower life form than a balky animal, and yet it's humility is such that it always responds faithfully to the sun.  So again, we find that Dante emphasizes his own authority by a display of humility.  The automaticity of the response makes it infallible.  Dante's suspended response, after hearing and envisioning the answered calls of Lucy, Beatrice, and Virgil is now completed, and Dante's will and that of his leader, lord, and master — Virgil — are one.  And where does this unification take place?  The heart.  And what attributes does the heart now have?  Courage and candor.  Now, when Virgil moves, just as the flower which rises and follows the path of the sun, Dante also moves.  The Canto is finished, and the introductions are finished, so that now, in Canto III, we pass through the gate of Hell proper.

Canto III
 
Time: Evening, April 8th, 1300, Good Friday

1  “Per me si va ne la città dolente,
2  per me si va ne l'etterno dolore,
3  per me si va tra la perduta gente.

4  Giustizia mosse il mio alto fattore;
5  fecemi la divina podestate,
6  la somma sapïenza e 'l primo amore.

7  Dinanzi a me non fuor cose create
8  se non etterne, e io etterno duro.
9  Lasciate ogne speranza, voi ch'entrate.”

1  "Through me the way is to the city dolent;
2  Through me the way is to eternal dole;
3  Through me the way among the people lost.
4  Justice incited my sublime Creator;
5  Created me divine Omnipotence,
6  The highest Wisdom and the primal Love.
7  Before me there were no created things,
8  Only eterne, and I eternal last.
9  All hope abandon, ye who enter in!"
Often what seems straightforward in Dante hides a little kink that a second look reveals, and these lines, among the most famous in all literature, seem to me to verge very close to heresy, and one wonders if Dante had been born 3 centuries later, he, like Bruno, would have been burned at the stake.  Here the Gate to Hell is inscribed, and the like the sêma tombstones of the ancient Greeks, the inscription is assumed to be the mouthpiece of the deceased below, which is activated by the passers-by when their own voice reads the words aloud — thereby bruiting the renown of the dead person.  What lines 4 - 8 imply is that Hell itself is speaking, both as being and as place, this entity created for the purpose of administering justice and gifted by it's (His?) maker with Divine omnipotence.  Nothing beyond the pale here, Hell knows without error just who is guilty and just how to punish them.  But what follows, if it were true, and not Hell's boast and lie, that Hell is sort of an necessary precursor to the rest of existence, and has been made before earth, and maybe before heaven.  In brief, this God of highest wisdom and primal love created Hell before He created anyone to put there!  This is very close to the Cathar heresy which the Church had crushed less than a century before in one of Europe's first genocides.  The Cathar's held that so much evil existed in the world that no just God could have created it, therefore this world was made by a demiurge as evil's toy.  If Hell comes first, that would be much like a mother digging the grave of her unborn child.  
If this makes no sense as Catholic Theology, a little twist of the lens seems to reveal the obvious fact that chaos precedes any possible order.  In fact, there can be no order if it did not have the grab-bag of the lowest elements from which to emerge.  And it also makes perfect poetic sense to depict this pre-created or uncreated thing as a gate, a maw, into which we enter to find a downward spiral into deeper levels of disorder, but a chaos that is winding down to heat death at its very nadir.  The image that Dante presents of this state which he calls Inferno is that of an inexorable downward pull, wherein the landscape and those doomed to inhabit it reveal greater and greater degrees of degradation, and lesser and lesser degrees of movement.  Abandon hope indeed!  The damned (la perduta gente) are like people who aspire to fly by attaching leaden wings — they grow heavier and more paralytic as they work harder to rise, the engine of their destruction being their own willful misapprehension of the laws of the universe.
More brilliant poetics:  In Canto II, Virgil asks why, why, why, why (perché) Dante is afraid, and that drumbeat repetition is recrudesced here with the phrase per me si va — well, this is why.  What we fear, what we have feared is made absolutely manifest in Hell.  Dante, the poet backs us into a terrible corner here, the same corner in which Dante the aspirant finds himself, that is to say, doomed, without a protector.  Now if Dante, the aspirant must obediently follow Virgil, to whom is our obedience salvation?  Answer: Dante, the poet.   
10  Queste parole di colore oscuro
11  vid' ïo scritte al sommo d'una porta;
12  per ch'io: “Maestro, il senso lor m'è duro.”

13  Ed elli a me, come persona accorta:
14  “Qui si convien lasciare ogne sospetto;
15  ogne viltà convien che qui sia morta.

16  Noi siam venuti al loco ov' i' t'ho detto
17  che tu vedrai le genti dolorose
18  c'hanno perduto il ben de l'intelletto.”
10  These words in sombre colour I beheld
11  Written upon the summit of a gate;
12  Whence I: "Their sense is, Master, hard to me!"
13  And he to me, as one experienced:
14  "Here all suspicion needs must be abandoned,
15  All cowardice must needs be here extinct.
16  We to the place have come, where I have told thee
17  Thou shalt behold the people dolorous
18  Who have foregone the good of intellect."
According to Douglas Hoffstadter in his book, I Am a Strange Loop, self-referentiality is the condition of the type of consciousness that makes humans human.  We know ourselves as ourselves.  This device that Dante uses, placing himself both in the poem as reader, and outside the poem, as writer, serves that function.  The text can interpret it's own dark words both through Virgil, and as the poem progresses, through many other characters.  Here dark words, words hard to understand (that word duro again), as we the readers also experience them, are commented upon by Virgil.  We could interpret Virgil thusly: "Your lack of understanding is the form that original sin (ignorance) takes inside you."  He calls it viltá, cowardice, the source of fear.  To understand this poem, we have to overcome the fear of our own ignorance, our own obstinance, and that is something we can decide to do by an act of volition, an act of reason.  This is Virgil's and Dante's definition of intellect: the ability to choose, and choose rightly.  And as Virgil says in line 18, the damned are in Hell because they have lost that ability.  It is not volition which guides them, but impulse, which in Dante's world is simply the animal nature in us dominating our human nature.
The next tercet shows a very tender moment, in which Virgil takes Dante's hand (image-hand in flesh-hand), and with a cheerful face (lieto volto), comforts Dante, and leads him inside (that's important: dentro, inside) secret things.  What things?  Why the things that are hard for us to understand, the things that are obscure to our intellect, the things that are being expressed in the Commedia — So here we are, the Commedia explaining itself to itself, and also to us, the readers, who use their intellect and, I would add, imaginations, to go inside the poem.  Commentators have pointed out secret things here means things that have been cut off from our understanding.  

19  E poi che la sua mano a la mia puose
20  con lieto volto, ond' io mi confortai,
21  mi mise dentro a le segrete cose.

19  And after he had laid his hand on mine
20  With joyful mien, whence I was comforted,
21  He led me in among the secret things.

22  Quivi sospiri, pianti e alti guai
23  risonavan per l'aere sanza stelle,
24  per ch'io al cominciar ne lagrimai.

25  Diverse lingue, orribili favelle,
26  parole di dolore, accenti d'ira,
27  voci alte e fioche, e suon di man con elle 

28  facevano un tumulto, il qual s'aggira
29  sempre in quell' aura sanza tempo tinta,
30  come la rena quando turbo spira.
22  There sighs, complaints, and ululations loud
23  Resounded through the air without a star,
24  Whence I, at the beginning, wept thereat.
25  Languages diverse, horrible dialects,
26  Accents of anger, words of agony,
27  And voices high and hoarse, with sound of hands,
28  Made up a tumult that goes whirling on
29  Forever in that air forever black,
30  Even as the sand doth, when the whirlwind breathes.
Quickly we pass from the implied pianissimo of secret things (le segrete cose, line 21), to a fortissimo human hubbub, a babble of laments and cries, all aural references because it is dark, but we will see later what is going on.  Think of fire at rush hour in a Tokyo subway station, or a terror attack in a crowded international airport.   Also note the enjambment of lines 27 — 29, the rhythms getting muddle, just like the voices that Dante hears are muddled — another of the myriad of instances where Dante's technique makes the physical sound, and the tongue, larynx, lungs of the reader conform to the sense of the verse.  We are moved because he physically moves us.    
The sky is without stars, and we are reminded of the metaphor in Canto II comparing the light in Beatrice's eyes to a star.  The passage ends with another metaphor from nature (note: this occurs in about the same place in Canto II, as the natural metaphor of the animal shying at shadows does in Canto II, Dante loves symmetry, and knows how to use it to create complexity).  This: of a dust devil swirled up in barren sand.  We will see how towards the end of this Canto another metaphor from nature bookends this one.  This: of autumn leaves being -— one by one — stripped from a tree.  The noise here is so great that in line 31- 33 (below), Dante binds his head, presumably in his hands to shut it out, and asks Virgil what he is hearing, and who these people are, who have been utterly vanquished by their sorrows.
Note: line 31 has an error, d'error, should horror, not error.  Although it might also be an error to neither see nor hear.  In meditation we cut off sound and sight in order to have inner guidance.      

31  E io ch'avea d'error la testa cinta,
32  dissi: “Maestro, che è quel ch'i' odo?
33  e che gent' è che par nel duol sì vinta?”

34  Ed elli a me: “Questo misero modo
35  tegnon l'anime triste di coloro
36  che visser sanza 'nfamia e sanza lodo.

37  Mischiate sono a quel cattivo coro
38  de li angeli che non furon ribelli
39  né fur fedeli a Dio, ma per sé fuoro.

40  Caccianli i ciel per non esser men belli,
41  né lo profondo inferno li riceve,
42  ch'alcuna gloria i rei avrebber d'elli.”

31  And I, who had my head with horror bound,
32  Said: "Master, what is this which now I hear?
33  What folk is this, which seems by pain so vanquished?"

34  And he to me: "This miserable mode
35  Maintain the melancholy souls of those
36  Who lived withouten infamy or praise.

37  Commingled are they with that caitiff choir
38  Of Angels, who have not rebellious been,
39  Nor faithful were to God, but were for self.
40  The heavens expelled them, not to be less fair;
41  Nor them the nethermore abyss receives,
42  For glory none the damned would have from them."
These lines depict the fate of those caught in the terrible double bind of having before them the starkest moral choice, on one side obvious infamy, on the other praise (lodo) (line 36), yet they can choose neither.  Infamy: to be renown for villainy of some sort; praise, to be renown for some good accomplishment.  But these are souls, along with those angels who in Satan's war against God, neither rebelled, nor were loyal, but selfishly stayed neutral (lines 38, 39).  They cannot attain heaven, nor will Hell accept them.  Further on, they are called blind (line 47).  They cannot learn, because they will not see.  This isn't just a quiet languishing in indifference, they are in what Bateson calls a double bind — that place in our psychic life where the contrast between what we should or should not do is so stark, and yet we bind our head, as Dante does here, to prevent his hearing ... hint, hint: it is too dark for him to see, and too intolerable with its cacophony of overlapping voices, languages, and sounds, for him to hear.  He bursts immediately into tears (line 24), which are not tears of pity, but more to the point, tears of his own anguish, springing from a confrontation of that which is disturbing and at the same time utterly incomprehensible.  The aspirant is suffering sensory overload, and so he closes himself off to the chaos that it roiling around and in him, and turns to Virgil's quiet and assured voice of reason (line 13: come persona accorta), and Virgil in the lines following (43 -51) explains.  

43  E io: “Maestro, che è tanto greve
44  a lor che lamentar li fa sì forte?”
45  Rispuose: “Dicerolti molto breve.

46  Questi non hanno speranza di morte,
47  e la lor cieca vita è tanto bassa,
48  che 'nvidïosi son d'ogne altra sorte.

49  Fama di loro il mondo esser non lassa;
50  misericordia e giustizia li sdegna:
51  non ragioniam di lor, ma guarda e passa.”

43  And I: "O Master, what so grievous is
44  To these, that maketh them lament so sore?"
45  He answered: "I will tell thee very briefly.
46  These have no longer any hope of death;
47  And this blind life of theirs is so debased,
48  They envious are of every other fate.
49  No fame of them the world permits to be;
50  Misericord and Justice both disdain them.
51  Let us not speak of them, but look, and pass."
Ah, this strikes so close to home for me: these sorrowful souls cannot live or die, and mercy and justice both refuse to claim them.  Their internal debate goes on, unresolved interminably.  In brief, they have and are a chronic disease in the soul which never reaches a healing crises, nor ever becomes fatal.  Virgil almost refuses to speak of them at all (they shall have no renown, no fame (line 45) I will tell thee very briefly, molto breve, their lives are so blind, so debased, that even the worse fates of those in Hell, they envy.  And then, in a very telling line (51): Let us not speak of them (give them no acknowledgement, no fame, as they gave none neither to God nor to the Devil), but look and pass.  The double bind here, is part of a doubling and mixing of images — opposites, complimentaries, and incongruous conflations — which will occur in other areas of the Canto. 
All of Canto III is about making irrevocable decisions, and crossing Rubicons of the spirit.  First we pass through the gates of Hell, from which there is no hope of return, and then we reach this chaos of indecisiveness, and from this too, we must choose.  Stay, and go into therapy for the rest of our lives without ever resolving our paralyzing issues, or stop talking about it, see what the problem is, and move on.  We cannot even harbor regret for this state of consciousness, and still manage to keep moving.
Note: The reader too must make a decision.  Is reading Dante about entertainment, requiring literary credentials, being intellectually well-rounded, or is it about transformation?  Lots of so-called artists or writers entertain, become famous, exert cultural influence  — Andy Warhol comes to mind —, but their work does not transform them or us, as artists like Joseph Beuys and Ansel Kiefer do.  When you read Dante, you have to ante up, put everything you have into the process, consider what he has to say, interpret it for yourself, and let what you are learning transform not just your reading but your living.   
52  E io, che riguardai, vidi una 'nsegna
53  che girando correva tanto ratta,
54  che d'ogne posa mi parea indegna;

55  e dietro le venìa sì lunga tratta
56  di gente, ch'i' non averei creduto
57  che morte tanta n'avesse disfatta.
52  And I, who looked again, beheld a banner,
53  Which, whirling round, ran on so rapidly,
54  That of all pause it seemed to me indignant;
55  And after it there came so long a train
56  Of people, that I ne'er would have believed
57  That ever Death so many had undone.
This is the first that we see of a typical punishment in Hell: some obsessive compulsive action which the damned are doomed to repeat, and which is symbolic of their error — in this case following a banner (as they refused to do in life), which whirls round and round, and goes nowhere.  It is just a banner, there is no symbol on it.  I like that the banner seems to have a kind of consciousness, a kind  of oddly sentient being taking a kind of pride in its perpetual motion, indignant (line 54) to pause.  The train of people following this banner are less conscious than the banner for they follow without thought.  And of course line 57 is the line that  Eliot so famously used in The Wasteland.
Note: The Gate to Hell, like the banner, also shows this sentience.  This war between impulse and reason is the war which Dante talks about in the beginning of Canto II, the war he fights alone.  And here Dante, by reversing the roles of sentient human and insentient object, emphasizes how far the damned have fallen, they are now irresistibly commanded by objects, or by the environment which engulfs them, their most egregious impulse harassing them continuously.    
58  Poscia ch'io v'ebbi alcun riconosciuto,
59  vidi e conobbi l'ombra di colui
60  che fece per viltade il gran rifiuto.

61  Incontanente intesi e certo fui
62  che questa era la setta d'i cattivi,
63  a Dio spiacenti e a' nemici sui.
58  When some among them I had recognized,
59  I looked, and I beheld the shade of him
60  Who made through cowardice the great refusal.
61  Forthwith I comprehended, and was certain,
62  That this the sect was of the caitiff wretches
63  Hateful to God and to his enemies.
What is important about these lines is that Dante reiterates what Virgil has told him, responding immediately to the lesson, as he did not immediately respond in Canto II.  He sees people he knows among this group, but pointedly does not mention their names, they're anonymity being part of their punishment.  They were those guilty of the "great refusal".  And what did they refuse?  They refused the call of their own genius, their own avocation (which means calling).  By grace, or if you prefer, the accident of their birth and their particular circumstances, they possessed a genius, and they squandered this treasure out of cowardice.  As such, not being loyal to their own best self, they could not be loyal to Satan or God either.  Curiously, this term "the great refusal" is how Walter Pater in his book of essays on the renaissance, listed as the primary attribute of Sandro Botticelli's work (which was a misreading on Pater's part), essentially describing an artist, who refused to take part in the political and theological violence of his day, and stood outside, or beyond, the influence of history to create an otherworldly beauty.  History, apparently, unknown to Dante, has ways of including even those who have deliberately tried to be free of it.  It's an interesting position Dante, the poet here, has taken, given that in his exile, he eventually dropped his political partisanship to become what appears to have been a kind of itinerant literary monk, he must have viewed his poet-self as his true self, as Blake would have said, the true partisan of a world where language itself is what he has committed himself to as a way to inject the ideals of transcendence down into the nitty-gritty of history.
One way that Dante historicizes his spiritual journey is by referring to real people, either those he personally knew, or those he knew of.  Here he speaks of his revelation, and his verification of Virgil's words, by seeing someone he knows, and from that achieving a certainy that these damned one he sees here are truly abominable enough to be enemies of both God and God's foes.  In line 64 (below) he says, they were never alive, and now they can never be truly dead. 
64  Questi sciaurati, che mai non fur vivi,
65  erano ignudi e stimolati molto
66  da mosconi e da vespe ch'eran ivi.

67  Elle rigavan lor di sangue il volto,
68  che, mischiato di lagrime, a' lor piedi
69  da fastidiosi vermi era ricolto.
64  These miscreants, who never were alive,
65  Were naked, and were stung exceedingly
66  By gadflies and by hornets that were there.
67  These did their faces irrigate with blood,
68  Which, with their tears commingled, at their feet
69  By the disgusting worms was gathered up.
Before leaving this group of excluded ones, he sees their punishment — gruesome indeed.  They are naked, and are stung by two types of insects: gadflies and hornets (mosconi, vespe), and that fact that there are two types of stinging insects reinforces that theme of the double bind.  Then this doubling continues as blood and tears mix and flow down there cheeks, to be eaten by worms at their feet.  The blood represents the body's excreta for physical pain, the tears, for emotional pain.  Now we move to the third experience recounted in this Canto (1— entering Hell's gate, and 2 — passing by this group of the uncommitted) to the crossing of the Acheron, and their confrontation with Charon.    
70  E poi ch'a riguardar oltre mi diedi,
71  vidi genti a la riva d'un gran fiume;
72  per ch'io dissi: “Maestro, or mi concedi

73  ch'i' sappia quali sono, e qual costume
74  le fa di trapassar parer sì pronte,
75  com' i' discerno per lo fioco lume.”

76  Ed elli a me: “Le cose ti fier conte
77  quando noi fermerem li nostri passi
78  su la trista riviera d'Acheronte.”

79  Allor con li occhi vergognosi e bassi,
80  temendo no 'l mio dir li fosse grave,
81  infino al fiume del parlar mi trassi.

70  And when to gazing farther I betook me.
71  People I saw on a great river's bank;
72  Whence said I: "Master, now vouchsafe to me,

73  That I may know who these are, and what law
74  Makes them appear so ready to pass over,
75  As I discern athwart the dusky light."

76  And he to me: "These things shall all be known
77  To thee, as soon as we our footsteps stay
78  Upon the dismal shore of Acheron."

79  Then with mine eyes ashamed and downward cast,
80  Fearing my words might irksome be to him,
81  From speech refrained I till we reached the river.

Dante, the aspirant, is beginning to see in the dusky light, that is to say, his own intellect is being slightly aroused, and when in the distance he sees a crowd clamoring to cross a river, he asks Virgil who these people are, and why they are gathered to cross the river, and Virgil rebukes him.  Why?  Apparently centuries worth of commentators have debated this question, but for me, the answer is: Don't let your little bit of vision outrun your experience.  As we go deeper, your insight will be better.  As Pope says: A little knowledge is a dangerous thing.  So, this refers to the sin of pride, which I think is verified by Dante's response.  He is ashamed, he drops his eyes, he considers the feelings of his guide, and he refrains from speaking until they reach the river.  Since this scene is a recapitulation of a scene in the Aeneid, Virgil's crankiness may have to do with Virgil's own feelings in returning to this dark place, which in a sense, was the dark, dense seed that sprouted into his own epic.  We know this because Virgil names the river, not the Homeric Styx, but the Aeneid's Acheron.  Remember how irksome it was when you were lost in a train of thought which someone interrupts to ask what they could see for themselves if they were attentive?  Well, that is how the aspirant reads his guide here.  This is also about obedience.  Here, Dante, the aspirant, is humbled, and instantly obeys.  He is still learning, but it's clear that from Canto II, he already has learned.     

82  Ed ecco verso noi venir per nave
83  un vecchio, bianco per antico pelo,
84  gridando: “Guai a voi, anime prave!

85  Non isperate mai veder lo cielo:
86  i' vegno per menarvi a l'altra riva
87  ne le tenebre etterne, in caldo e 'n gelo.

88  E tu che se' costì, anima viva,
89  pàrtiti da cotesti che son morti.”
90  Ma poi che vide ch'io non mi partiva,

91  disse: “Per altra via, per altri porti
92  verrai a piaggia, non qui, per passare:
93  più lieve legno convien che ti porti.”

94  E 'l duca lui: “Caron, non ti crucciare:
95  vuolsi così colà dove si puote
96  ciò che si vuole, e più non dimandare.”

82  And lo! towards us coming in a boat
83  An old man, hoary with the hair of eld,
84  Crying: "Woe unto you, ye souls depraved!

85  Hope nevermore to look upon the heavens;
86  I come to lead you to the other shore,
87  To the eternal shades in heat and frost.

88  And thou, that yonder standest, living soul,
89  Withdraw thee from these people, who are dead!"
90  But when he saw that I did not withdraw,

91  He said: "By other ways, by other ports
92  Thou to the shore shalt come, not here, for passage;
93  A lighter vessel needs must carry thee."

94  And unto him the Guide: "Vex thee not, Charon;
95  It is so willed there where is power to do
96  That which is willed; and farther question not."

Here is the confrontation with Charon, who arrives in his empty boat, ready to take another load of the damned to eternal punishment.  Dante depicts him as an old man, and the word bianco, white, recurs here as an echo of the frost/flower metaphor in Canto II, and of course with the word gelo in the next tercet we find a foreshadowing of the very depths of Hell as a lake of ice.  Again the rhymes of pelo (hair) cielo (heaven, like the sun in Canto II) and gelo (frost, ice) tell a story of opposites colliding, as Dante, the living aspirant does here, with the dead.  More doubling and incongruous mixing.  The word Guai is an echo for one of the lamentable sounds the indecisive damned made earlier in this Canto, but Caron uses it as a threat: Woe!  (In modern Italian, I think it means troubles or problems.) Then Charon goes on to make a refusal (disobedience, unresponsiveness) saying that the living cannot find a way into Hell through him.  He is the ferryman of the dead.  This the first of many mythological characters we meet in Hell, a reference perhaps to the debased pagan tradition, that has now been replaced by Christianity.  We will meet others like him in the descent.  Charon is also one of the first of many throughout the entire Commedia who immediately notices the anomaly of a living person appearing among the dead, and he makes use of the term light (as in not heavy) as the kind of boat that Dante needs to ferry him.  I think this is a play on words that is about a heavy or light mood, and no living body can have a mood heavier than that of the damned.  On the other hand, no shade, can be as physically heavy as a living body.  It would not be uncharacteristic of an entity like Charon to be ironic, and throughout the Commedia there is a lot of irony, but Dante, the poet, generally puts this irony in the mouths of other characters, or in the situation, and is careful not to make the overall tone of the work ironic — irony is a feature of our age (as Northrup Frye points out in The Anatomy of Literature), as faith is a feature of Dante's.  The second that irony creeps into the mouth of one of the faithful regarding faith, that mouth is doomed to damnation.  I just read a quote from the architect Robert Venturi which seems pertinent here:

The movement of a view of life as essentially simple and orderly to a view of life as complex and ironic is what every individual passes through in becoming mature. { } Amid simplicity and order rationalism is born, but rationalism proves inadequate in any period of upheaval.  Then equilibrium must be created out of opposites.  Such inner peace as men grain must represent a tension among contradictions. { }  A feeling for paradox allows seemingly dissimilar things to exist side by side, their very incongruity suggesting a kind of truth.  (Venturi was fascinated by the Las Vegas strip, its signage, and hodge-podge of incongruous building, which he championed as emblematic of modern life.)  

Virgil rebukes Caron, and commands obedience on behalf of one who is, to barrow Steven's phrase: The Will of Wills.  As he had a moment before with the aspirant, Dante, he tells Charon not to question him.  A repetition that would not be lost on Dante, the aspirant.  Virgil's authority cannot be questioned in Hell because it is backed by the authority of Heaven.

Line 85, of course, is an echo of the inscription over the Gates of Hell, when Charon says: Hope never more to look upon the heavens.   

97  Quinci fuor quete le lanose gote
98  al nocchier de la livida palude,
99  che 'ntorno a li occhi avea di fiamme rote.

97  Thereat were quieted the fleecy cheeks
98  Of him the ferryman of the livid fen,
99  Who round about his eyes had wheels of flame.

Caron is quelled by Virgil's rebuke, quiet as a lamb (the reference to fleecy cheeks), but mad as the devil (the reference to the wheels of fire which are his eyes — again, doubling, and mixing of incongruous things.  There is also a description of the place (more atmosphere in Dante's map of Hell, painting a geographic picture which mirrors the state of the psyche, a very cinemagraphic technique.)

The crossing of water, of course, is revisited later when we see the souls bound for Purgatory and ferried, not by a demon, but by an angel. 
 
100  Ma quell' anime, ch'eran lasse e nude,
101  cangiar colore e dibattero i denti,
102  ratto che 'nteser le parole crude.

103  Bestemmiavano Dio e lor parenti,
104  l'umana spezie e 'l loco e 'l tempo e 'l seme
105  di lor semenza e di lor nascimenti.

106  Poi si ritrasser tutte quante insieme,
107  forte piangendo, a la riva malvagia
108  ch'attende ciascun uom che Dio non teme.

109  Caron dimonio, con occhi di bragia
110  loro accennando, tutte le raccoglie;
111  batte col remo qualunque s'adagia.

100  But all those souls who weary were and naked
101  Their colour changed and gnashed their teeth together,
102  As soon as they had heard those cruel words.

103  God they blasphemed and their progenitors,
104  The human race, the place, the time, the seed
105  Of their engendering and of their birth!

106  Thereafter all together they drew back,
107  Bitterly weeping, to the accursed shore,
107  Which waiteth every man who fears not God.

109  Charon the demon, with the eyes of glede,
110  Beckoning to them, collects them all together,
111  Beats with his oar whoever lags behind.

Weary and naked: Utterly vulnerable.  Doubling.

The power of language: the damned change color and gnash their teeth after hearing the words exchanged by Virgil and Charon.  Doubling.

The  degradation of cursing, as opposed to the elevation of praising.  Doubling.

The difference between being driven and being led.  Doubling.

112  Come d'autunno si levan le foglie
113  l'una appresso de l'altra, fin che 'l ramo
114  vede a la terra tutte le sue spoglie,

115  similemente il mal seme d'Adamo
116  gittansi di quel lito ad una ad una,
117  per cenni come augel per suo richiamo.

118  Così sen vanno su per l'onda bruna,
119  e avanti che sien di là discese,
120  anche di qua nuova schiera s'auna.
112  As in the autumn-time the leaves fall off,
113  First one and then another, till the branch
114  Unto the earth surrenders all its spoils;
115  In similar wise the evil seed of Adam
116  Throw themselves from that margin one by one,
117  At signals, as a bird unto its lure.
118  So they depart across the dusky wave,
119  And ere upon the other side they land,
120  Again on this side a new troop assembles.
Now we have the formal return of a natural metaphor: the fall of autumn leaves, but doubled with the metaphor of birds entering a trap (we will see much more of the bird-trope in the next Canto), which is a bookend to the natural metaphor of the whirlwind of sand in line 30 of this Canto, and in another repetition, a new troop of souls assembles to repeat the process.  The craftsmanship of Dante again being exquisite, or to paraphrase Pope, here form is an echo to the sense — with an almost clockwork precision.  And yet it doesn't feel mechanical or contrived, it seems more like we are viewing an animal with its left and right sides in organic symmetry. 
121  “Figliuol mio,” disse 'l maestro cortese,
122  “quelli che muoion ne l'ira di Dio
123  tutti convegnon qui d'ogne paese;

124  e pronti sono a trapassar lo rio,
125  ché la divina giustizia li sprona,
126  sì che la tema si volve in disio.

127  Quinci non passa mai anima buona;
128  e però, se Caron di te si lagna,
129  ben puoi sapere omai che 'l suo dir suona.”
121  "My son," the courteous Master said to me,
122  "All those who perish in the wrath of God
123  Here meet together out of every land;
124  And ready are they to pass o'er the river,
125  Because celestial Justice spurs them on,
126  So that their fear is turned into desire.
127  This way there never passes a good soul;
128  And hence if Charon doth complain of thee,
129  Well mayst thou know now what his speech imports."
Lines 121 — 129 are Virgil's homily, a sort of Aesop's Fable moral, which does sound ironic in the pagan's mouth, even with the sort mild ministerial beginning of "My son."  But this too is a symmetry, contrasting with his earlier rebuke of Dante for being too impetuous with his questions — again doublin and mixing.  Here in contrast, Virgil is courteous (another epithet for him, along with magnanimous), and offers information without being asked.  And now the aspirant is clearly humble enough to receive the lesson.
130  Finito questo, la buia campagna
131  tremò sì forte, che de lo spavento
132  la mente di sudore ancor mi bagna.

133  La terra lagrimosa diede vento,
134  che balenò una luce vermiglia
135  la qual mi vinse ciascun sentimento;

136  e caddi come l'uom cui sonno piglia.
130  This being finished, all the dusk champaign
131  Trembled so violently, that of that terror
132  The recollection bathes me still with sweat.
133  The land of tears gave forth a blast of wind,
134  And fulminated a vermilion light,
135  Which overmastered in me every sense,
136  And as a man whom sleep hath seized I fell.
This Canto which began with whirlwinds, ends with an earthquake, and a flash of vermillion light (the demonic double of the rose light at the end of the Paradisio).  Dante, the aspirant, breaks into a sweat, passes out, returning to the condition of sleep or coma, which obscured the first stirrings of his spiritual journey in Canto I.  Dante, the poet, is emphasizing here that real spiritual work has physiological consequences, not just psychological ones.  With current brain imaging techniques, we can now actually see changes in the brain in long-time meditators who are supposed to be enlightened, and maybe this is what is happening here.

Canto IV

Circle I, Limbo, Still Good Friday evening, April 8th, 1300. 

1  Ruppemi l'alto sonno ne la testa
2  un greve truono, sì ch'io mi riscossi
3  come persona ch'è per forza desta;

4  e l'occhio riposato intorno mossi,
5  dritto levato, e fiso riguardai
6  per conoscer lo loco dov' io fossi.

7  Vero è che 'n su la proda mi trovai
8  de la valle d'abisso dolorosa
9  che 'ntrono accoglie d'infiniti guai.

10  Oscura e profonda era e nebulosa
11  tanto che, per ficcar lo viso a fondo,
12  io non vi discernea alcuna cosa.

1  Broke the deep lethargy within my head
2  A heavy thunder, so that I upstarted,
3  Like to a person who by force is wakened;

4  And round about I moved my rested eyes,
5  Uprisen erect, and steadfastly I gazed,
6  To recognise the place wherein I was.

7  True is it, that upon the verge I found me
8  Of the abysmal valley dolorous,
9  That gathers thunder of infinite ululations.

10  Obscure, profound it was, and nebulous,
11  So that by fixing on its depths my sight
12  Nothing whatever I discerned therein.

One thing an artist has to learn is that the border area between sleep and waking has about it an extraordinary access to both the unconscious and the waking mind.  Dante explores that border area again in the first 12 lines of Canto IV.  The word portentous comes to mind.  There's a temptation for translators to translate the phrase l'alto sonno, as deep sleep, but it is a feature apparently of Dante's Italian to say high sleep.  That alto to me is a place where perspective is broadened, as it is when we survey a landscape from a mountain peak, and in this case the perspective, accompanied by a drum roll of heavy thunder (greve truono), is distorted, obscured, and as we learn, resonant with an infinite chain of aftershocks.  Canto III ended with thunder, Canto IV begins with it, but the term Ruppemi, Break, not only adds to the violence of this awakening, but literally breaks Canto IV apart from its predecessor, and tells us that we have entered some kind of timeless state, which separates the two.  This is another example of the extreme skill displayed in Dante's technique, how the placement of a single word serves as an axle which turns one mighty gear inside another.  

So much scholarly ink has been spilled on whether Dante expects the reader to believe that his is a literal physical journey.  But this little detail almost surely warns the savvy reader against believing so.  How would Dante get from one physical locale to another?  He could not possibly be carried by Virgil, because in other sections of the Commedia the shades pass right through each other and through Dante.  So, I think it is better to maintain that the whole of this journey takes place in some quasi-land like that stated above: something between the physical and the spiritual, with some characteristics of both states present.  

The term guai (simply trouble in modern Italian) is used again, translated by Longfellow as ululations, but since Charon uses it as an insult, translated as Woe (Woe to you) in Canto III, we have to feel around for another definition.  I don't think there is a single term in English that covers this.  It is a loud, lamenting cry, and an insult to the ears that are forced to hear it.  It is the human equivalent of that heavy meteorological thunder.  

Dante, the aspirant, stands up, looks around, but can see nothing, so we know that however horrible the atmosphere was in Canto III, this place is worse.  The aspirant is going to have go a bit owl-eyed to see in the dark, something more like insight than sight is required.  The ears too are taking a pounding, but they are operational, and if we tune up the volume of our imaginations, we can hear the depth of Virgil's voice, and even Dante's over the din.  In spite of Hell's awesome portentousness, our two protagonist reign in Hell, by virtue of a divine dispensation.  They are still able to speak to each other and hear, like the quiet or soundless voices in our heads, they are still mightier than the continuous rumblings of any external Hell. 

13  “Or discendiam qua giù nel cieco mondo,”
14  cominciò il poeta tutto smorto.
15  “Io sarò primo, e tu sarai secondo.”

16  E io, che del color mi fui accorto,
17  dissi: “Come verrò, se tu paventi
18  che suoli al mio dubbiare esser conforto?”

19  Ed elli a me: “L'angoscia de le genti
20  che son qua giù, nel viso mi dipigne
21  quella pietà che tu per tema senti.

22  Andiam, ché la via lunga ne sospigne.”
23  Così si mise e così mi fé intrare
24  nel primo cerchio che l'abisso cigne.

13  "Let us descend now into the blind world,"
14  Began the Poet, pallid utterly;
15  "I will be first, and thou shalt second be."

16  And I, who of his colour was aware,
17  Said: "How shall I come, if thou art afraid,
18  Who'rt wont to be a comfort to my fears?"

19  And he to me: "The anguish of the people
20  Who are below here in my face depicts
21  That pity which for terror thou hast taken.

22  Let us go on, for the long way impels us."
23  Thus he went in, and thus he made me enter
24  The foremost circle that surrounds the abyss.

In this passage, the aspirant-Dante's eyes suddenly grow acute, fixed on their guide, for he discerns in this blind world (cieco mondo) that Virgil has grown all pale (tutto smorto).  If I were going to make a film of this, I would give both these protagonists an inner light, rather like the light we see through the wax at the top of a candle, when the flame has burned down below the tip's lip.  It seems to me that what is happening here is very much like what I experience in my dreams where there is no directionality to the light, but where objects are self-illuminated, like those bioluminescent creatures of the ocean's benthic realms.  Fascinating.  Dante, the aspirant, suddenly draws back.  If Virgil is afraid, how can he have courage?  An allegorical interpretation would be: the human emotion of fear overcomes reason.  But reason, i.e., Virgil, does get the upper hand, as Virgil explains that Dante has mistaken his pale color for fear, when it is really is pity (pietà) for those below: pity for himself too, because the people below are his people — this is Virgil's place in Hell.  In the phrase nel viso mi dipigne (in my face is painted) the reflexive verb is used, as if Virgil were aware, as Longfellow translates it, of his own pallor.  It makes the reader ask, just how far Virgil's cognition extends in this, his world?  The phrase che tu per tema senti, (which you as fear have felt) carries with it the sense, lost in translation, of the closeness that Dante feels for Virgil, even mirroring his emotions in his own.  

Then they descend, reason leading feeling.  

25  Quivi, secondo che per ascoltare,
26  non avea pianto mai che di sospiri
27  che l'aura etterna facevan tremare;

28  ciò avvenia di duol sanza martìri,
29  ch'avean le turbe, ch'eran molte e grandi,
30  d'infanti e di femmine e di viri.

31  Lo buon maestro a me: “Tu non dimandi
32  che spiriti son questi che tu vedi?
33  Or vo' che sappi, innanzi che più andi,

34  ch'ei non peccaro; e s'elli hanno mercedi,
35  non basta, perché non ebber battesmo,
36  ch'è porta de la fede che tu credi;


37  e s' e' furon dinanzi al cristianesmo,
38  non adorar debitamente a Dio:
39  e di questi cotai son io medesmo.

40  Per tai difetti, non per altro rio,
41  semo perduti, e sol di tanto offesi
42  che sanza speme vivemo in disio.”

43  Gran duol mi prese al cor quando lo 'ntesi,
44  però che gente di molto valore
45  conobbi che 'n quel limbo eran sospesi.
25  There, as it seemed to me from listening,
26  Were lamentations none, but only sighs,
27  That tremble made the everlasting air.
28  And this arose from sorrow without torment,
29  Which the crowds had, that many were and great,
30  Of infants and of women and of men.
31  To me the Master good: "Thou dost not ask
32  What spirits these, which thou beholdest, are?
33  Now will I have thee know, ere thou go farther,
34  That they sinned not; and if they merit had,
35  'Tis not enough, because they had not baptism
36  Which is the portal of the Faith thou holdest;
37  And if they were before Christianity,
38  In the right manner they adored not God;
39  And among such as these am I myself.
40  For such defects, and not for other guilt,
41  Lost are we and are only so far punished,
42  That without hope we live on in desire."
43  Great grief seized on my heart when this I heard,
44  Because some people of much worthiness
45  I knew, who in that Limbo were suspended.
Throughout the Commedia, there seems to be a kind of connecting ether, by which the very atmosphere is charged with the emotional and moral state of its inhabitants: the place and the people and other entities in it are conflated in an inextricable entanglement.  Here, in line 27, che l'aura eterna facevan tremare (the everlasting air is made to tremble) by the sighs of those inhabiting it.  Dante comes again to his awareness, by listening first, the trope an exact rhyme of that in Canto III, wherein he heard the cacophonous babbling howls and curses of the indecisive, before he saw them.  The contrapuntal nature of his technique is almost closer to a cannon than a fugue, so precise is his placement from Canto to Canto of these tropes.  Here, however, there are no curses, no howls of torment, but only sighs, the sighs of those free of pain, but still heavy with unfulfillable desires.  The hear/see motif is also continued when in line 53 below, Virgil tells us that Dante not only hears these souls, but he also sees them.  A particular emotional coloration is infused throughout this Canto: these are people who are literally suspended like colloidals in an a nearly stagnant solute comprised of this one feeling.  What that feeling, or better feeling/cognitive state, is is vagueness.  They don't know what they want, they only know that they don't have it.  They are hungering for what I would call transcendence.  Dante, the aspirant, hears these soft laments, which the poet Dante describs as turbines (le turbe), whirlwinds, not crowds as the translator would have it, but whirlwinds of sighs issuing from infants, women, and men (viri, not uomo, men, but men of valor), which we learn further on in line 35 are the unbaptized — those living before the incarnation of Christ or who died before being baptized.  In Christian theology, this is pretty clear, and also cruelly doctrinal.  You can't really explain it away, as Christians have been trying to do for a couple of thousand years, without perverting morality to the point where souls are punished by the operations of fate and time alone, and not because — as Virgil informs us — they had volitional demerits. This postulates a God who makes souls to damn, just as He had in Canto III prepared a Hell before He created anyone to put in it.  So let's do something else.  If praise (the virtue that Beatrice possesses as we know from Canto II) is the coin of the realm of heaven, sorrow is Hell's atmosphere that the inhabitants both breathe and perpetuate with their hopelessness.  What all these people seem to lack is the feeling of adoration, colored, I think, with awe.  If we compare these two states: awe-inspired adoration and sorrowful depression, we find that they are mutually exclusive.  There are chemical states in the body (such as the brain chemistry that determines sleep or wakefulness), which operate like the two far ends of a teeter-totter.  They cannot both be in ascendance simultaneously, when one is up, the other is down, and whichever side is up has the feeling tone of everlastingness, l'aura eterna, as Dante calls it, an everlasting air.  Now this interpretation has bite: it doesn't matter what you believe as doctrine.  It doesn't matter what you have done, sinful or virtuous.  And infantile innocence is too needy and dependent to confer the state.  When this is your brain-state you are in limbo.  Now can you get out of limbo by bootstrapping from the limited brain-state resources available to you there: No.  You're stuck, you're suspended.

Caveat: I don't want to just replace the metaphor of Christian theological doctrine with brain-state metaphors.  Doctrine has its virtues: it's simple, it can be taught, it can be made into rules, and rules can be followed, obeyed.  But does obedience to doctrine lead to transcendence?  Probably it does for certain people for whom questioning does not arise.  But for those who have already questioned ... ?
Brain-state doctrine is slippery too, but perhaps more foundational.  It speaks in terms of chemistry, which may be as much effect as cause, while transcendence, it seems to me, is something other than that.  Those of us who took hallucinogenic drugs in the 1960's and 70's got blown away by brain chemistry.  Doctrine got exploded as an irrelevence.  But the questions did not cease, the chemical transcendence was a bubble state, great in its moment, but not very transferable as the kind of merging of external and internal environments which Dante is illustrating in a negative sense here.  
It seems to me that transcendence has a linguistic aspect, something between either the internal environment (brain/body chemistry) and the external environment (politics, economics, relationships, the weather).  Transcendence seems to arise neither from the sign nor from the signified, but from some process that conflates and magnifies the two and is indeed worthy of awe-inspired adoration.    
46  “Dimmi, maestro mio, dimmi, segnore, 
47  comincia' io per volere esser certo
48  di quella fede che vince ogne errore:

49  “uscicci mai alcuno, o per suo merto
50  o per altrui, che poi fosse beato?”
51  E quei che 'ntese il mio parlar coverto, 

52  rispuose: “Io era nuovo in questo stato,
53  quando ci vidi venire un possente,
54  con segno di vittoria coronato.

55  Trasseci l'ombra del primo parente,
56  d'Abèl suo figlio e quella di Noè,
57  di Moïsè legista e ubidente;

58  Abraàm patrïarca e Davìd re,
59  Israèl con lo padre e co' suoi nati
60  e con Rachele, per cui tanto fé,

61  e altri molti, e feceli beati.
62  E vo' che sappi che, dinanzi ad essi,
63  spiriti umani non eran salvati.”

46  "Tell me, my Master, tell me, thou my Lord,"
47  Began I, with desire of being certain
48  Of that Faith which o'ercometh every error,
49  "Came any one by his own merit hence,
50  Or by another's, who was blessed thereafter?"
51  And he, who understood my covert speech,
52  Replied: "I was a novice in this state,
53  When I saw hither come a Mighty One,
54  With sign of victory incoronate.
55  Hence he drew forth the shade of the First Parent,
56  And that of his son Abel, and of Noah,
57  Of Moses the lawgiver, and the obedient
58  Abraham, patriarch, and David, king,
59  Israel with his father and his children,
60  And Rachel, for whose sake he did so much,
61  And others many, and he made them blessed;
62  And thou must know, that earlier than these
63  Never were any human spirits saved."
What is happening here?  Dante addresses Virgil as teacher and Lord, exactly as the followers of Jesus addressed him, and not only that, the answer that Dante expects seems specifically to address the question that I alluded to previously: How could a moral God damn the innocent?  What the aspirant seems to be asking is this:  Is there a loophole somewhere in the doctrine that states that the unbaptized can attain the state of blessedness?  Why are all those born before the Incarnation damned?   Modern readers who do not necessarily adhere to the Catholic orthodox position in 14th century Italy will eventually have to ask this question too.  What does the Incarnation mean?  And — can unbelievers ever attain the state of blessedness?  Dante, the aspirant, seems to think that he can be certain of that faith which is victorious over every error  (quella fede che vince ogne errore), only if these two things are so.  1) There is such an escape hatch out of limbo and into paradise, and 2) If Virgil, one of those doomed to this eternal state of sad suspension, accepts his own fate, then reasonable people can find a punishment just, even if it falls on them.  Essentially it's an appeal to the infallibility of authority, no matter how arbitrary or quixotic that authority happens to be.

Virgil answers by describing a one-time off event (like the Incarnation!), which automatically puts the event in historical, sequential time.  What happened then, will never happen again.  And what exactly did happen?  A Divine intervention.  When Virgil was new in the state (and Longfellow's translation of novice, is wrong I think, because a novice in Dante's world would have been a religious novitiate: a monoco novizo, and Virgil could have never have been that.) Virgil witnessed un possente (a Mighty One: by implication, this is Jesus, harrowing Hell, which he would have done after his death on the cross on this Day, Good Friday, until his resurrection on Easter Sunday).  Note: There is an interesting prohibition against mentioning the name, like the old Jewish prohibition of saying the name of God, and curiously, further in this Canto, in the midst of a litany of names, there is another whose name is not spoken aloud, i.e. Aristotle.  But to resume.  This Mighty One is con segno di vittoria coronato (with the sign victory crowned).  What would this vittoria coronato be?  A halo?, or just an expression that indicates one who has passed beyond judgement, to someplace like that which Rumi refers to when he says:

Somewhere out beyond right and wrong,
There is a field — I'll meet you there.

We don't know what this sign is, but suffice it to say, that this question of authority is answered for Virgil because whoever this being is (he does not know) he has the power to do that which Virgil himself cannot do, which is to say: Get people out of Hell.  And that list would be:

Adam (the first parent)
Abel
Noah
Moses
Abraham
David
Israel
Isaac (name unmentioned)
David
and Rachel (already referred to in Canto II) which is probably Dante the poet's endorsement of the blessedness of a contemplative practice)

There are also altri molti (many others) so essentially this etcetera is an invitation to the reader to place anyone else that they deem worthy on to that flight.  The technique here of just rattling off a list of names is an old one.  It's a museum inventory list, which I believe is included because names have numa — names, especially for a poet, have power.  They are incantatory.  Each name is a kind of doorway to the adventure of the life whose possessor wore that name, an open sesame for anyone to use if they then decide to open that door, and go on to discover just what the experience and the lessons to be learned from that experience might be.  If you get bored by just having to read the name, perhaps that means that you are not ready or even worthy of that experience.  

We should also be clear here that this Divine intervention is (or in this case was) the only way to get out of Hell.  Virgil also adds that earlier than these, no human spirits were saved.  Since Adam, the first human is on the list, we can assume that this statement is essentially an affirmation that the list includes everyone ever born, whom the Divine deems worthy.  And as we shall see in the Purgatorio, when we find Cato there, the elect might also include a pagan and a suicide.

Any reasonable person will find this whole explanation of why certain people are in limbo rather oily and smarmy — but reason is not the issue here, faith and obedience are, and the justification for those attributes could never be found in Hell.
      
64  Non lasciavam l'andar perch' ei dicessi,
65  ma passavam la selva tuttavia,
66  la selva, dico, di spiriti spessi.

67  Non era lunga ancor la nostra via
68  di qua dal sonno, quand' io vidi un foco
69  ch'emisperio di tenebre vincia.

70  Di lungi n'eravamo ancora un poco,
71  ma non sì ch'io non discernessi in parte
72  ch'orrevol gente possedea quel loco.

73  “O tu ch'onori scïenzïa e arte,
74  questi chi son c'hanno cotanta onranza,
75  che dal modo de li altri li diparte?”

76  E quelli a me: “L'onrata nominanza
77  che di lor suona sù ne la tua vita,
78  grazïa acquista in ciel che sì li avanza.”
64  We ceased not to advance because he spake,
65  But still were passing onward through the forest,
66  The forest, say I, of thick-crowded ghosts.
67  Not very far as yet our way had gone
68  This side the summit, when I saw a fire
69  That overcame a hemisphere of darkness.
70  We were a little distant from it still,
71  But not so far that I in part discerned not
72  That honourable people held that place.
73  "O thou who honourest every art and science,
74  Who may these be, which such great honour have,
75  That from the fashion of the rest it parts them?"
76  And he to me: "The honourable name,
77  That sounds of them above there in thy life,
78  Wins grace in Heaven, that so advances them."
As they talk, they walk, and Dante, the poet, returns to the first trope of the first of first tercet of the entire Commedia: the forest.  Here, it's a dark forest too, just as it was at the very first (for all hominids this true) but Dante very pointedly repeats the word selva.  This is a forest thick with ghosts: la selva {} di spiriti spessi.  And isn't it true that as we grow older, descending back in memory through time, that we are always passing through this forest of spirits?  And this forest grows thicker as the skin of our bodies grows thinner with increasing senescence.  Again the trope of an atmosphere of the dead, which we remember are turbines of swirling energy, as a tree is a column of swirling energies.  Always the city boy, for Dante the forest is not a place of refuge, but a place of confusion, or regression.  Back we go from Homo Sapiens to Homo Erecti.  And it is obvious that here in Canto IV he is deliberately echoing the situation described in Canto I, when in addition to the word selva, he now uses the words: la nostra via, a slight phonetic change from la nostra vita.  And just as in Canto I, here again he has awakened from sleep, or from a swoon, as he says in line 68: di qua dal sonno (not far from sleep), again sticking to that borderline area between the unconscious and the conscious mind, that rich, but fuzzy both/and state thick with rich possibilities, but nothing as yet solid, nothing clear.  In the distance Dante sees a hemisphere of fire.  A hemisphere is half a sphere, so again we have the idea of something only partially manifested, something the aspirant only discerns in parte.  Its fire is victorious (vincia) over the darkness, just as the Christ who harrowed Hell was a victorious figure.  So this is how Dante is alerting us that this is the abode of those who are victorious, but only partially so.  This hemisphere of fire is held by honorable people, it is Virgil's place, and here, set apart with his fellows, the master of every science and art, lives — in Hell, a place illuminated by the brilliance of his and their earthly accomplishments.  The people we are about to encounter live in this bubble, set apart from the vulgar crowd, as people displaying some kind of genius are also set apart from people content to live more ordinary lives.  We are reminded her of the one of Beatrice's reasons, besides his love of her, that Dante was chosen for this special dispensation: He is a man set apart from the vulgar crowd.  Remember the etymology of the word vulgar.  It suggests thronging or crowding: the poor we find teeming in every city.  Any person now, who reads Dante, just for their own esthetic and spiritual edification, can feel this.  They too are people set apart, and they will be reminded of that by the throng.  How this situation plays out is the theme of this Canto.  Dante asks what makes these people so honorable that they are set apart.  And again, the value of praise and of a lasting name is confirmed.  They win grace (the first time this word appears in the Commedia) because heaven values the praise that the living have bestowed upon them.  It's really quite an extraordinary idea — that the living, by the respect they grant these dead for their accomplishments on earth, preserve and advance the dead.  No wonder naming and repetition of names is so important, it is as if the speaking of that name in praise is a kind of bell, the circle of whose resonance somehow protects the dead from falling into the post-mortem oblivion of anonymity, and in this case returning to that mass of mixed-up whirlwinds which constitute the forest of ghosts through which Virgil and Dante are passing.  And sure enough, what do we hear first in the following tercets: praise of Virgil, and a litany of names, repeated like mantras which keep these damned insulated — and let us not forget — suspended — from the tortures of the damned. 
79  Intanto voce fu per me udita:
80  “Onorate l'altissimo poeta;
81  l'ombra sua torna, ch'era dipartita.”

82  Poi che la voce fu restata e queta,
83  vidi quattro grand' ombre a noi venire:
84  sembianz' avevan né trista né lieta.

85  Lo buon maestro cominciò a dire:
86  “Mira colui con quella spada in mano,
87  che vien dinanzi ai tre sì come sire:

88  quelli è Omero poeta sovrano;
89  l'altro è Orazio satiro che vene;
90  Ovidio è 'l terzo, e l'ultimo Lucano.

91  Però che ciascun meco si convene
92  nel nome che sonò la voce sola,
93  fannomi onore, e di ciò fanno bene.”

79  In the mean time a voice was heard by me:
80  "All honour be to the pre-eminent Poet;
81  His shade returns again, that was departed."
82  After the voice had ceased and quiet was,
83  Four mighty shades I saw approaching us;
84  Semblance had they nor sorrowful nor glad.
85  To say to me began my gracious Master:
86  "Him with that falchion in his hand behold,
87  Who comes before the three, even as their lord.
88  That one is Homer, Poet sovereign;
89  He who comes next is Horace, the satirist;
90  The third is Ovid, and the last is Lucan.
91  Because to each of these with me applies
92  The name that solitary voice proclaimed,
93  They do me honour, and in that do well."

In these lines (80 - 81) a voice (whose voice, we do not know — the voice of the place itself?) speaks, welcoming Virgil, who is greeted on his return with the phase "Onorate l'altissimo poeta / l'ombra sua torna, ch'era dipartita. ( All honor be to the preeminent poet/his shade returns that had departed).  Most high poet: no jealousy or envy here, only mutual praise — but there is a hierarchy, as we shall see, a lineage actually, if we recall the idea of lineage from Canto I.  We might think of those passages in the Bible of who begat whom in the long chain of umbilicals stretching across the generations.  Again we have the motif: first hear, and then see. Virgil narrates.  He informs the aspirant, Dante, of the identities of those approaching, their facial expressions pointedly neither sad nor happy — a kind of toned-down parody of the indecisive damned in the previous Canto.  These shades are also caught in an inbetween state, but they seem to have accepted their fate, and, their only torment is this perpetual stagnation.

Now, let's consider what the conception of time must be like for those in limbo, and by implication, for all those in Hell.  First, it is clear from the voice's words that those there know they are shades.  This may seem like a small detail, but it violates the almost universal belief that "the dead do not know they are dead", just as the dreaming self does not know it is dreaming.  Here they know, and throughout the Commedia they know.  But perhaps more interesting is that by stating that Virgil departed, and has now returned, we learn that these people conceive of time as perpetual, not eternal.  In other words, they are not experiencing the timeless state that an artist or a poet experiences when he or she is totally absorbed in the creative process.  They are experiencing an interminable sequence of moments.  Time can thus weigh on them, but it cannot destroy them.  To me, this adds a considerable degree of torment to their existence, which I hope to be able to comment on later.  

The four great poets approach apparently in single file, like so many Chinese wives, from first to last, with Homer, the most ancient, the sire (that word being more than some commentators would have it: an abbreviation for segnore), it refers to a father, the head of a lineage, as noted above.  We have seen this kind of lineage before in Canto II with the Virgin Mary, St. Lucy, and Beatrice.  And also in Canto I with the lineage which led to the founding of Rome.  But there is another curious feature here, which Dante probably did not know about, although it does serve as an example of what every poet learns — the text that he or she is writing  has insights which go beyond their own conscious mind.  Note the following:

Homer
Horace: 65 b.c. to 8 b.c.
Ovid: 43 b.c. to 18 b.c.
Lucan: 39 a.d. to 65 a.d.

This is a list of poets who are sequential in historical time, in other words, each successive link in the chain could have been inspired by his predecessor.  We can only learn from people who precede us in historical time.  This may seem obvious, since in our minds everything we know or are influenced by exists as a simultaneity, and so experientially this is something we can only understand by abstract reasoning.  Our actual experience of those who have inspired us is more cloud-like than chain-like, but here, we see it as a chain.  Like the step by step procedure of walking, which is what Dante and Virgil, as the text tells us back in line 64, are doing.

If the text in these lines is a sequence from first to last in historical time, then by calling Virgil the preeminent poet, he should, after Homer, have come first historically in this group of poets.  Virgil's life span?  70 b.c. to 19 b.c.  He precedes Horace by half a decade.  Virgil also modelled the Aeneid after Homer's Odyssey.  Most influenced by Homer, eldest son, equals — l'altissimo poeta.

There is an important piece of external symbology here too, lest any of the other poets forget who their father is.  Homer carries a "spada" in his hand, (very Freudian and phallic) and Virgil calls him sovereign.

The sequence of course could be arranged in other ways, such as: the order in which we have read the poets, or the order of their merit — the most inspiring to the least.  And these orders are not mutually exclusive.  If I am right about sequentiality referring to historical time, then there are ways of ordering time that are not deterministic, except in the fact that one event follows another in some manner in our consciousness.

It's also worth thinking about the interplay of the word "honor" throughout this Canto.  I'll quote another commentator and translator of Dante, Robert Hollander:

This new place, the only place in hell in which light is said to overcome darkness (Inf. IV.68-69), is immediately linked to the 'key word' of this section of the canto, 'honor.' This is the densest repetition of a single word and its derivates in the Comedy: seven times in 29 lines (72-100: at vv. 72, 73, 74, 76, 80, 93, 100), with a 'coda' tacked on at v. 133. Can there be any doubt that honor and poetry are indissolubly linked in Dante's view of his own status? As lofty as noble actions and great philosophy may be for him (but that part of the canto, vv. 106-147, has only a single occurrence of the word 'honor'), it is poetry that, for Dante, is the great calling.

Why this is so, and why exactly poetry deserves this preeminence, is a lengthy discussion for another time, but it's worth noting here that poetry has some special qualities as a mode of knowing, feeling, and transforming that are unique, a proposition that will become more apparent as we delve deeper into the poem. 
  
One final note: If Homer is blind, as he was famously reputed to be in his earthly life, he does not seem to be here.  Because if he is, and it is not stated one way or another, this would be more ironic than the blind leading the blind, it would be the blind leading the sighted.  I would take this to mean that for poets the insight that comes from speaking and hearing can trump what we can garner from reading and seeing.  Too bad I don't have Marshall McLuhan here to tell me how one sensory mode/medium or another changes the way we assimilate knowledge and experience.   

94  Così vid' i' adunar la bella scola
95  di quel segnor de l'altissimo canto
96  che sovra li altri com' aquila vola.

97  Da ch'ebber ragionato insieme alquanto,
98  volsersi a me con salutevol cenno,
99  e 'l mio maestro sorrise di tanto;

100  e più d'onore ancora assai mi fenno,
101  ch'e' sì mi fecer de la loro schiera,
102  sì ch'io fui sesto tra cotanto senno.

103  Così andammo infino a la lumera,
104  parlando cose che 'l tacere è bello,
105  sì com' era 'l parlar colà dov' era.
94  Thus I beheld assemble the fair school
95  Of that lord of the song pre-eminent,
96  Who o'er the others like an eagle soars.
97  When they together had discoursed somewhat,
98  They turned to me with signs of salutation,
99  And on beholding this, my Master smiled;
100  And more of honour still, much more, they did me,
101  In that they made me one of their own band;
102  So that the sixth was I, 'mid so much wit.
103  Thus we went on as far as to the light,
104  Things saying 'tis becoming to keep silent,
105  As was the saying of them where I was.
In lines 96 -7, there is an ambivalence that is more or less unresolvable.  Does the text mean to say that Homer or Virgil soar eagle-like, seeing farther or further than the others?  Or does the text refer to the epic genre that both practiced, epic being the highest song (l'altissimo canto)?  Since it so ambivalent, I prefer to let it remain so: poets, poetry, and the style of poetry are so entangled that it would be a disparagement of one aspect to elevate it above the others.  They all rise like the eagle whose sight enables it to see everything below.  In modern parlance: it is simply a higher state of consciousness, a metaposition. 
There is one smile (sorrise), and one smile only in all of Dante's Hell, and it is here, when Virgil smiles at Dante as the assembled poets accept him as the sixth incarnation of their band of exalted brothers.  The word honor returns, and its nimbus envelops Dante.  Thus Dante, who has yet to write his greatest work, seems already laurelled.  Is this arrogance on Dante the poet's part?  Maybe.  But it could be that Dante needs that tonic in order to write the Commedia, an amazing attempt, which, in order to become an amazing accomplishment, must be fortified with a considerable amount of audacity, and anyone who purports to be revealing the secrets of Hell, Purgatory and Paradise certainly has got some Moxy.  Great enterprises require great energy, and by adding himself to this ongoing lineage, Dante places himself at the growing tip of a mighty dynasty.  The other poets pay him honor because he has carried on their work, because he has honored them too — again the theme of praising.
In the last tercet before Dante and Virgil come to the noble castle, the text speaks of moving more into the light, and of speaking of things that are better left in silence.  Another deliberate ambiguity.  We remember secret things from Canto III, things not necessarily hidden, but beyond our understanding, as if the things spoken about were transmitted in a foreign tongue which is the special province of poets to understand, and would only tempt the uninitiated to believe that they know something, which they have yet to do the hard work required to really experience.  If I tell you what transformation means, you only have a dictionary definition, not a poetic experience.  And you might sit there comfortably smug in believing you have wisdom, when you only have a roadblock to achieving wisdom.  The text tells us that the group of poet is constantly moving toward the light.  That's good advice, and probably the only advice that will uncover what before seemed ineffable.     

106  Venimmo al piè d'un nobile castello,
107  sette volte cerchiato d'alte mura,
108  difeso intorno d'un bel fiumicello.

109  Questo passammo come terra dura;
110  per sette porte intrai con questi savi:
111  giugnemmo in prato di fresca verdura.

112  Genti v'eran con occhi tardi e gravi,
113  di grande autorità ne' lor sembianti:
114  parlavan rado, con voci soavi.

115  Traemmoci così da l'un de' canti,
116  in loco aperto, luminoso e alto,
117  sì che veder si potien tutti quanti.

118  olà diritto, sovra 'l verde smalto,
119  mi fuor mostrati li spiriti magni,
120  che del vedere in me stesso m'essalto.


106  We came unto a noble castle's foot,
107  Seven times encompassed with lofty walls,
108  Defended round by a fair rivulet;

109  This we passed over even as firm ground;
110  Through portals seven I entered with these Sages;
111  We came into a meadow of fresh verdure.

112  People were there with solemn eyes and slow,
113  Of great authority in their countenance;
114  They spake but seldom, and with gentle voices.

115  Thus we withdrew ourselves upon one side
116  Into an opening luminous and lofty,
117  So that they all of them were visible.

118  There opposite, upon the green enamel,
119  Were pointed out to me the mighty spirits,
120  Whom to have seen I feel myself exalted.

Now Virgil and Dante, along with the four poets who greeted them, come to the source of the light.  It is a castle, which has been traditionally called the Castle of Wisdom, and this castle is circled by seven high walls, and is ringed round by a beautiful little stream.  The seven walls have been said to represent the four moral virtues — prudence, temperance, fortitude and justice, plus the three intellectual virtues — understanding, knowledge, and wisdom.  The stream is allegorically assumed to represent eloquence.  Then our group of six, like a half-dozen versions of Jesus, walk over the water as if it were firm ground.  A little razzle dazzle here, it being easily done by shades who have no substance, but Dante, the living body, should have sunk.  That he does not shows us that the whole place is more dream image than anything else, and Dante for all his efforts to convince us that his is a literal physical body, and that the entire journey of the aspirant is as real as a journey would be from Florence to Rome, with a detail like this, again shows us that the laws of this place are not those that constrain material bodies in a material world.  Like the shades we find here, physical laws in limbo are in suspension too.  No gravity here, no electromagnetic force, no strong and weak nuclear forces, this place is governed by imagination, just as reading and writing is, it is a land where poetry supplants temporal restraints, and here we might have a reference in the representation of this castle of the things that Dante and the others spoke of in the previous lines, and which Dante thought better to leave unexpressed.  And yet here we see a mystery manifested, as our group of poets walk through seven gates and arrive in a green meadow.  The traditional allegorical reading is that these seven gates symbolize the seven liberal arts, the trivium of grammar, logic, and rhetoric, and the quadrivium of music, arithmetic, geometry, and astronomy.  The poets then would be passing through an intellectual curriculum to arrive at a fertile place where Hell itself is illuminated and where all the great figures of history troop about with eyes slow (tardi) and solemn (gravi).  Like people in a museum dedicated to their own accomplishments, their speech here comes rarely (rado) and from soft (soavi) voices.  No matter what we might think 6 into 7 twice might mean, and what the meadow symbolizes, all this is clear enough to visualize, but destined to remain opaque to the understanding.  We really only know what the text reveals, and after that the imagination may freely paint whatever graffiti it likes on those seven walls and those seven gates.  This, and all the rest of the considerable numerology of the poem, represents a kind of proportionality in the Commedia, which gives the imagination of both poet and reader a frame in which to order itself, a kind of city enclosing a garden that saves those inside from the general psychosis which would run amok in a dark, wild chaos without these secure borders to contain its excesses.  We are reminded of Blake's dictum in the Marriage of Heaven and Hell: Energy is the only life of the Body and Reason is the bound or outward circumference of Energy, and to add a gloss, the body without boundaries is only a cancer or a slime mold.  The six poets assume an elevated and illuminated position (the position of the reader and the writer in relation to the text), where they may survey and inventory what this castle both contains and protects.  

I must admit I find this place quite lugubrious, all these quiet ghosts padding about and speaking in soft, solemn whispers, not doing anything great, but just stagnating in their reputations of greatness and processing around in their old habiliments of fame, hollowed out and emptied of everything but their names.  And yet what names!  Thrilling names really for anyone who has imaginatively entered the story of their lives and accomplishments.  Dante, the aspirant, is in awe.  Like a kid at Disneyland, he is finally seeing the animatrons of all the heroes he has met in his studies, and as I said before, the names themselves each becoming a kind of mantra whose repetition can summon the vision of their bodies.  What follows is a catalog of greatness, held together by the phrase I saw (vidi).  I saw!  I saw!  I saw!  I saw!  I saw!  Now that is the eureka cry of every student and reader, when after long labor, suddenly the object of their contemplation comes alive in the mind, and illumination replaces darkness.  We are exalted.  The common grass becomes shining enamel (verde samlto), and we cry:  I see!  I finally see!  That is a great moment, but to stay in that moment, is to be a spectator, a scholar, and not a creator.  It is to be a fan, not a player, and it reminds me of those grown men in bars who have arguments about the sports and players that they can only watch.  Until I see becomes I am, we cannot enter the pantheon of greatness ourselves, we can only watch luminous ghosts and repeat their names and accomplishments.    

121  I' vidi Eletra con molti compagni,
122  tra ' quai conobbi Ettòr ed Enea,
123  Cesare armato con li occhi grifagni.

124  Vidi Cammilla e la Pantasilea;
125  da l'altra parte vidi 'l re Latino
126  che con Lavina sua figlia sedea.

127  Vidi quel Bruto che cacciò Tarquino,
128  Lucrezia, Iulia, Marzïa e Corniglia;
129  e solo, in parte, vidi 'l Saladino.

130  Poi ch'innalzai un poco più le ciglia,
131  vidi 'l maestro di color che sanno
132  seder tra filosofica famiglia.

133  Tutti lo miran, tutti onor li fanno:
134  quivi vid' ïo Socrate e Platone,
135  che 'nnanzi a li altri più presso li stanno;

136  Democrito che 'l mondo a caso pone,
137  Dïogenès, Anassagora e Tale,
138  Empedoclès, Eraclito e Zenone;

139  e vidi il buono accoglitor del quale,
140  Dïascoride dico; e vidi Orfeo,
141  Tulïo e Lino e Seneca morale;

142  Euclide geomètra e Tolomeo,
143  Ipocràte, Avicenna e Galïeno,
144  Averoìs che 'l gran comento feo.

121  I saw Electra with companions many,
122  'Mongst whom I knew both Hector and Aeneas,
123  Caesar in armour with gerfalcon eyes;

124  I saw Camilla and Penthesilea
125  On the other side, and saw the King Latinus,
126  Who with Lavinia his daughter sat;

127  I saw that Brutus who drove Tarquin forth,
128  Lucretia, Julia, Marcia, and Cornelia,
129  And saw alone, apart, the Saladin.

130  When I had lifted up my brows a little,
131  The Master I beheld of those who know,
132  Sit with his philosophic family.

133  All gaze upon him, and all do him honour.
134  There I beheld both Socrates and Plato,
135  Who nearer him before the others stand;

136  Democritus, who puts the world on chance,
137  Diogenes, Anaxagoras, and Thales,
138  Zeno, Empedocles, and Heraclitus;

139  Of qualities I saw the good collector,
140  Hight Dioscorides; and Orpheus saw I,
141  Tully and Livy, and moral Seneca,

142  Euclid, geometrician, and Ptolemy,
143  Galen, Hippocrates, and Avicenna,
144  Averroes, who the great Comment made.

There are 34 names on this list, and one person, unnamed, but referred to in the tercet beginning at line 130:

130  Poi ch'innalzai un poco più le ciglia,
131  vidi 'l maestro di color che sanno
132  seder tra filosofica famiglia.

130  When I had lifted up my brows a little,
131  The Master I beheld of those who know,
132  Sit with his philosophic family.

The first thing I should say is that the translation of le ciglia as brows is misleading.  It should be eyelashes.  Dante, the aspirant, has been half asleep the whole time!  And then the unnamed one's epithet is The Master "of those who know".  This is very sly on Dante the poet's part.  Why?  Because if you are not one of those "who know" that this is Aristotle, you don't belong in the family of philosophers.  The raised eye motif as we have noted before is not perhaps to be construed as spatial, but perspectival.  Aristotle, as is Caesar mentioned in line 123 with the gyrfalcon eyes, sees further, not farther, these two, like the highest poet mentioned earlier, have more insight than others.  But in Aristotle, there is something ineffable, or unmentionable, we have to ferret that something out on our own, otherwise it is quite superficial and worthless to us.

Now the list comes to 35 people, plus the 5 poets with Dante: that makes 40.  These numbers have a numerological symbology.  From a Bible Study website I find this quote:

Mentioned 146 times in Scripture, the number 40 generally symbolizes a period of testing, trial or probation. During Moses' life he lived forty years in Egypt and forty years in the desert before God selected him to lead his people out of slavery. 
Moses was also on Mount Sinai for 40 days and nights, on two separate occasions (Exodus 24:18, 34:1 - 28), receiving God's laws. He also sent spies, for forty days, to investigate the land God promised the Israelites as an inheritance (Numbers 13:25, 14:34).

The prophet Jonah powerfully warned ancient Nineveh, for forty days, that its destruction would come because of its many sins. The prophet Ezekiel laid on His right side for 40 days to symbolize Judah's sins (Ezekiel 4:6). 
Elijah went 40 days without food or water at Mount Horeb. Jesus was tempted by the devil not just three times, but MANY times during the 40 days and nights he fasted just before his ministry began. He also appeared to his disciples and others for 40 days after his resurrection from the dead.

I think Dante would have probably been very aware of this sort of thing.  And indeed, the entire Inferno and Purgatorio do represent a period of trial and testing.  Beyond that, I think it is safe to say that number for Dante, as much as number in the I Ching, is foundational, a kind of armature or skeleton, upon which the squishier parts of the universe hang.

If, as a reader, you had the intensity to go through this list and study each figure on it, you would be approaching the kind of education that Dante no doubt received, so we could say that each person on this list from soldiers to sufferers to philosophers to poets to historians to doctors to rulers to wives to sisters to mothers to astronomers to mathematicians — would be a torch which illuminates some area of human activity and experience.  As does the Commedia as a whole, the list demands exegesis, a delving into, and like dreams to Freud, interpretation is  even more crucial than surface content.  Interpretation — specifically "what this means to me" —  is what is transformational for the reader.

145  Io non posso ritrar di tutti a pieno,
146  però che sì mi caccia il lungo tema,
147  che molte volte al fatto il dir vien meno.

148  La sesta compagnia in due si scema:
149  per altra via mi mena il savio duca,
150  fuor de la queta, ne l'aura che trema.

151  E vegno in parte ove non è che luca.

145  I cannot all of them pourtray in full,
146  Because so drives me onward the long theme,
147  That many times the word comes short of fact.

148  The sixfold company in two divides;
149  Another way my sapient Guide conducts me
150  Forth from the quiet to the air that trembles;

151  And to a place I come where nothing shines.

"I cannot all of them portray in full," and don't I know how he feels!  Each name on this list is a temptation to be diverted from the downward journey into Hell.  And isn't this a fact about any intense and long-term project?  There are interruptions, fatigue, diversions — little shiny objects that tempt you from the path, which is arduous, and demands a constant, almost inhuman focus.  But onward and downward we must go, lest we be caught like these shades in limbo, suspended in in pleasant but unproductive suburban eddy, and cut off from the onward flow of our quest.
  
It should be pointed out here that the Dante who speaks in line 145 is the poet Dante, not the aspirant Dante.  We get a brief glimpse here of the wizard behind the curtain, and are reminded briefly of the diachronic nature of the quest: part of us in the middle, part of us already there.

In keeping with some of the other irreconcilable ambiguities already mentioned we come to the curious line: La sesta compagnia in due si scema (The sixfold fold company in two divides.)  6 divided by 2 is 3.  This is basic arithmetic, because every school child knows that 2, Dante and Virgil, is not 3.  The answer is wrong.  But is it?  A quote from T.S. Eliot's Wasteland might serve us here:

   Who is the third who walks always beside you?
When I count, there are only you and I together
But when I look ahead up the white road
There is always another one walking beside you
Gliding wrapt in a brown mantle, hooded
I do not know whether a man or a woman
— but who is that on the other side of you?

Is the other traveler the aspirant Dante accompanied by his gliding poet self?  Is it the future reader?  Is it Beatrice, his anima, his soul?  It's all so ambiguous, and, I believe meant to be.  The question opens us up to inquiry.  In the end, only unanswerable questions are worth asking, because they reveal to us the awesome nature of infinity.

The last two lines of this Canto are full of foreboding.  We are leaving a place of heady quiet and luminance, to where the air trembles and no light shines.  The poet in his study finds that the real risk to his spiritual journey is the ease and reassurance he finds in his former accomplishments.  All the people in limbo are quite literally resting on their laurels.  But how fearful it is to throw everything that you've done away to descend once more into the turbulent unknown.

Canto V
1  Così discesi del cerchio primaio
2  giù nel secondo, che men loco cinghia
3  e tanto più dolor, che punge a guaio.

4  Stavvi Minòs orribilmente, e ringhia:
5  essamina le colpe ne l'intrata;
6  giudica e manda secondo ch'avvinghia.

7  Dico che quando l'anima mal nata
8  li vien dinanzi, tutta si confessa;
9  e quel conoscitor de le peccata

10  vede qual loco d'inferno è da essa;
11  cignesi con la coda tante volte
12  quantunque gradi vuol che giù sia messa.

13  Sempre dinanzi a lui ne stanno molte:
14  vanno a vicenda ciascuna al giudizio,
15  dicono e odono e poi son giù volte.

1  Thus I descended out of the first circle
2  Down to the second, that less space begirds,
3  And so much greater dole, that goads to wailing.
4  There standeth Minos horribly, and snarls;
5  Examines the transgressions at the entrance;
6  Judges, and sends according as he girds him.
7  I say, that when the spirit evil-born
8  Cometh before him, wholly it confesses;
9  And this discriminator of transgressions
10  Seeth what place in Hell is meet for it;
11  Girds himself with his tail as many times
12  As grades he wishes it should be thrust down.
13  Always before him many of them stand;
14  They go by turns each one unto the judgment;
15  They speak, and hear, and then are downward hurled.

Overview note: Dante is passing through his greatest danger, he comes out of the quietude of the "Castle of Wisdom" lauded as a great poet, i.e. crowned with hubris, and forgets about humility.  This puts him into a kind of coma of self-congratulation, and he wakes up in this Canto as if being forcefully aroused (i.e., against his will), and then he proceeds in a downward spiral to the greatest of humiliations — his movement declining from deep sleep to death.  He stops listening to Virgil (reason), and begins listening to Francesca (impulsiveness), forgetting that in Hell, all the discourse of its denizens is fomented from a place of denial, ignorance, and deception.  Four words to think about: Humility, Hubris, Humiliation, Humus.  As in The Tibetan book of the Dead, he might have had an opportunity here to rise out of Hell, but he misses his chance through pity of Francesca's state, and falls even lower then he was in the very first Canto.
Dante uses the word circhio, circle, but this must be more like a spiral, a corkscrew actually, since he tells us that the second circle is wrapped tighter than the first.  We have seen this geometric figure before in the whirlwind columns of the sighs of the unbaptized in limbo, and we see it again in this python-like tail of Minos, which wraps round the sinners, born losers, as the text says in line 7: l'anima mal nata.  Consciously, as we follow the narrative line in the descent, we are apt to miss these repetitions, but they fractally mirror the entire shape of Hell, screwing down, tighter and tighter, as if we were on the inside of an auger, just as in the Purgatorio we wind up and up, on the outside of the same auger, the sinners there undoing what the sinners below have done.  The sinners line up in single file, as the celebrants of a diabolic mass might line up to take communion, but in this case the line is one of those about to take confession.  Minos, father of the Minotaur, is their demonic father confessor, who offers not absolution, but damnation.  Minos is a monstrous figure because he is a conglomeration of human, snarling canine, and serpent.  This means that he is a creature driven by warring aspects of his own self, there is no harmony in his being, and no harmony in those whom he is judging.  And anyone who has that voice in their heads which says: You're an idiot.  A louse.  A criminal.  A layabout.  A worthless piece of dung, etc. is facing Minos.  He coils his serpent tail around his victims, one cinching for every level of Hell they must descend.  This is punishment squared for every coil, because in the second turn you are not released from the first, so your agony is doubled, in the third doubled again, and so forth, so that even if you manage to free yourself from one judgement, another charge still must be answered.  Minos is the conoscitor — the one who knows, the one from whom nothing is hidden, because even if you hide your transgressions from everyone else, you cannot hide it from your own conscience.  From the words confessa (confess) in line 8, and offizio (office) further down in line (18), we can read Minos as a parody of the priest in his Holy office as a confessor.  The coiling of his tail repeats the vortical shape, which like a certain figuration in music, keeps returning again and again in various permutations.  The word guaio, translated here as wailing, recurs in line 3, and repeats the hear/see sequence, because after the wailing, the aspirant sees Minos standing at the entrance of this second turn of the screw, this another repetition, reminiscent of the entrance to Hell itself in Canto III, so once again we are crossing a certain Rubicon of conscience, of guilt, just as we had in Canto IV with Charon, the circle's demon gate keeper, who ferried sinners across Acheron.  These are clearly processing stations, a kind of Ellis Island where the immigrants do not continue on in hopefulness, but in sorrow, and when Minos confronts Dante and Virgil, he clearly recognizes that they are out of place.
Note: In line 7, the word Dico, I say, tells us that the writer Dante is speaking, not Dante the aspirant.  This is a knowing figure from the beyond, the author outside the work, as inspiration appears outside the everyday personality.  This Dico reminds me of the shamanic healers, transformed by psilocybin or some other hallucinogen, who keep repeating the word says: dawn of night says, river's spirit says, cure of all ills says — so again we hear a reiteration of the power of the word, as we do also in the dicono e odono (they speak and they hear) in line 15.  In Hell we are talking to ourselves, confessing with one voice, damning with another, and so it goes round and round like polluted water swirling down a drain.  The damned here are not in suspension as they were in Canto IV.  The swamp is being drained, but only into a more fetid swamp — and all is done through the power of the word.  This power cannot be quelled even in Hell, because, like everything else, Hell is its own creation.  Or as Steven's says: "It is a world of words to the end of it."  

16  “O tu che vieni al doloroso ospizio,”
17  disse Minòs a me quando mi vide,
18  lasciando l'atto di cotanto offizio

19  “guarda com' entri e di cui tu ti fide;
20  non t'inganni l'ampiezza de l'intrare!”
21  E 'l duca mio a lui: “Perché pur gride?

22  Non impedir lo suo fatale andare:
23  vuolsi così colà dove si puote
24  ciò che si vuole, e più non dimandare.”

16  "O thou, that to this dolorous hostelry
17  Comest," said Minos to me, when he saw me,
18  Leaving the practice of so great an office,
19  "Look how thou enterest, and in whom thou trustest;
20  Let not the portal's amplitude deceive thee."
21  And unto him my Guide: "Why criest thou too?
22  Do not impede his journey fate-ordained;
23  It is so willed there where is power to do
24  That which is willed; and ask no further question."
In line 20, when Minos uses the word ospizio (hostelry: check our words hotel and hospital) should be read as a parody, since these souls are not guests but prisoners.  In Hell lies are the norm, not the exception, and then he goes on to warn Dante not to be fooled by the amplitude (L'ampiezze) of the entrance.  L'ampiezza means essentially the same in English as in Italian (according to my English/Italian Dizionario Tecnico), that is: vast.  I find it interesting that it's a term describing sound waves, an audio reference, then, as well as a spatial one.  It is said that the chemical changes in some of Vermeer's paintings over time have resulted in more verisimilitude, not less, and so Dante's sensitivity to language allows his vocabulary, even as time passes, to grow more rich, more apropos than anything he might have originally intended.  That's one reason why the text becomes our guide and not only some antiquated glossary of whatever Dante might have originally intended.  What the words meant in the 14th century, that's our starting point, but they have grown, and those original meanings are amplified by time, commentary, and migrations from culture to culture.  Dante's reference here is probably to the Biblical verse 
13 Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in there at:
14 Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it.
					Matthew 7:13-14 King James Version 
Another parody this, because we learned in line 2 of this Canto that this way is getting smaller, although there are many indeed "which go in thereat."  It's a trap, and Minos, not ordained to judge the quick, but only the dead, warns Dante off.  But not without a dig at Virgil, telling Dante "Guarda ... di cui tu ti fide."  (Watch out in whom you have placed your trust.)  Virgil's response is essentially the same as it was to Charon in Canto IV.  And it boils down to "Shut up!, that which has more power than you wills this.  Don't ask any more questions."  That Minos clearly obeys (another lesson in obedience) shows that as contrary as he is, he too is ordained by that power, and he executes his office on its behalf.  I like the word impedir (impede) used here, because like the word amplitude. it too has expanded in significance (impedance/impedienza) by having a modern technical sense. These things add a depth to the text as we read more than seven centuries later, which would not have been discernable to Dante or his contemporaries.  And, I might add, in response to purests who want only to adhere to Dante's original intentions: We cannot help but add this depth, any more than we can reverse entropy.  
25  Or incomincian le dolenti note
26  a farmisi sentire; or son venuto
27  là dove molto pianto mi percuote.

28  Io venni in loco d'ogne luce muto,
29  che mugghia come fa mar per tempesta,
30  se da contrari venti è combattuto.

31  La bufera infernal, che mai non resta,
32  mena li spirti con la sua rapina;
33  voltando e percotendo li molesta.

34  Quando giungon davanti a la ruina,
35  quivi le strida, il compianto, il lamento;
36  bestemmian quivi la virtù divina.

37  Intesi ch'a così fatto tormento
38  enno dannati i peccator carnali,
39  che la ragion sommettono al talento.

40  E come li stornei ne portan l'ali
41  nel freddo tempo, a schiera larga e piena,
42  così quel fiato li spiriti mali

43  di qua, di là, di giù, di sù li mena;
44  nulla speranza li conforta mai,
45  non che di posa, ma di minor pena.

25  And now begin the dolesome notes to grow
26  Audible unto me; now am I come
27  There where much lamentation strikes upon me.

28  I came into a place mute of all light,
29  Which bellows as the sea does in a tempest,
30  If by opposing winds 't is combated.
31  The infernal hurricane that never rests
32  Hurtles the spirits onward in its rapine;
33  Whirling them round, and smiting, it molests them.

34  When they arrive before the precipice,
35  There are the shrieks, the plaints, and the laments,
36  There they blaspheme the puissance divine.

37  I understood that unto such a torment
38  The carnal malefactors were condemned,
39  Who reason subjugate to appetite.

40  And as the wings of starlings bear them on
41  In the cold season in large band and full,
42  So doth that blast the spirits maledict;

43  It hither, thither, downward, upward, drives them;
44  No hope doth comfort them for evermore,
45  Not of repose, but even of lesser pain.

In this tercet of lines 25 - 27, Dante's accute sense of hearing are compared to musical notes growing in volume, until they seem like an assault on the ears, which he likens to a hurricane at sea of contending winds.  Compare Shakespeare's line: "Mad as the sea and wind when both contend which is the mightier."  Like the red eye on the planet Jupiter, this is a storm that never ends, and it whirls (another vortice metaphor) around souls caught in its fury, and every pass they make near the precipice from which they were cast is pelted by their shrieks and laments, articulated enough to be recognized by Dante as blasphemies against the divine justice which has condemned them.  Here is the famous synaesthesia where the hear/see sequence is finally conflated into one sensation: luce muto (mute light) — marvelous.  We begin to percieve a pattern at the beginning of these Cantos wherein articulate speach is torn apart by sighs, wails, howls, shrieks, curses — in short, Hell is the vulgar mob all contending against one another, and against their fate.  What a contrast from the ornate speech which Beatrice praises in Virgil in Canto II!  It is almost as if Dante, the man, were injured by too much noise, and lived with a sort of hands-pressed-to-the-ears  attitude of an autistic child who cannot bear too much exterior intrusion into his private cognitive process.  The synaesthesia too indicates a person whose neurology worked differently from run-of-the-mill brains who are considered normal.  There is something else too: Dante's ears are affected by what he hears, his eyes take in the scene in the mute light, but his body somehow seems undisturbed as it stands and contemplates this tormenting hurricane.  This force whips about the bodies of the shades, and yet does not knock either him nor Virgil down.  Again, the laws of the physical universe are suspended here, and replaced by the laws of imagination, the laws of dream, and language.  Note the placement of the natural metaphor of the storm at sea, and how it compares to the placement of other natural metaphors in the earlier cantos.  In the next few lines another more original and famous natural metaphor continues the whirlwind trope, this one of starlings whipped about in a never-resting gale (37 - 45).  The sound in Italian is so perfect, so musical, but it is a mad music such as tormented birds might make when caught in ceaseless tumult: di qua, di là, di giù, di sù li mena — ah! ah! ooh! ooh!.  This not just a description, this is a reification of the sound of this place where those guilty of sins of the flesh — i peccator carnali — are damned, their lust subjugating their reason.

Reason?  We talk about it as if we knew what it is, or as if we could know what it is.  In my work with Neurolinguistic Programming (NLP) I became aware of the difference between the wholly reflexive part of the brain and nervous system, that which happens automatically as an interaction of the organism and the environment, and that which can choose to act "volitionally".  We call the reflexive automaticity "conditioning", of which there are two kinds:  Natural conditioning and learned conditioning.   An example of natural conditioning is what we see when the doctor donks our knee with a little rubber hammer and our leg kicks.  All the senses work on this principle, you open your eyes, you automatically see, sound waves flow through the environment, you automatically hear, something hot touches you, you automatically feel the heat.  In addition to this natural conditioning, we have conditioning that has been learned, whole sequences of gestures and chemical changes in the brain and body that are triggered by an event that has been imprinted by some type of experience in our past.  Traumas work like this.  You are bitten by a dog as a two year old, and thereafter all dogs, all pictures of dogs, all smells of dogs, trigger a fear response.  Probably many allergies work the same way, the allergen, which is harmless to others with your same physiology, causes your immune system to overreact and attack you.  Reading or learning your native tongue works the same: it becomes automatic, the sound of someone speaking, or the shape of letters flashed on your eyes automatically become this weird thing called "meaning".  You get in your car, and with thousands of triggers from learned responses, without consciously thinking about it, you drive.  In fact, all behaviors of any real complexity rely on these two systems of conditioning, interacting with one another and with the environment with an intelligence as old as the evolution of life — and — to try to think about these behaviors only interferes with them.  Watching your feet when you walk, for example, is likely to throw off your equilibrium and make you trip.  

Experiments have shown that while the conscious mind (and we will get to what this is in a minute) can only keep track of 7 things (perhaps the origin of the magic we attribute to the number 7) plus or minus 2.  The unconscious mind however — this interactive system of learned and natural conditioning — is tracking millions of bits of information, and automatically responding to keep you alive without your conscious mind having to be bothered about it at all.  So, we can see that the organism has a vested interest — a survival need — to transfer as much behavior into the system of conditioning as it can, or the conscious mind will be overloaded, become dysfunctional, and interfere with the operation of this evolutionary intelligence.  What then is the conscious mind?  Now inspite of research on the brain to discover what has become known as "the hard problem", we don't need to know how the brain does this to understand how consciousness actually functions.  What does it do?  Or to put it in terms that Dante would understand.  How does reason function?  How does it productively guide this evolutionary and learned system of conditioned responses?  We've already seen that consciousness is an interrupt, it breaks the chain of conditioning — the automaticity — and it serves as a pause button that stops the reflexive response.  And what happens in that pause — that moment of paralysis?  Alternative scenarios arise — what ifs — what if I do this instead of that? — what if I don't do what I did before that had such a disastrous result? — what if I do something different, how will the outcome be different?  In short, in these alternative scenarios we harrow Hell.  We think about restoring what was damaged.  We imagine a future with a more felicitous outcome.  This ability to split the mind off from automaticity, and allow it time to create multiple virtual possibilities seems to be what Dante is referring to by reason.  The crucial question is: Can we learn to instantly obey the precepts of the reasonable best case scenario? — i.e. blessedness, or right behavior, or moral behavior, or whatever else you might want to call it.  Can we learn to condition our responses to pause when the impulse of the conditioned system is going to lead to disaster for ourselves or others?  And if so, how do we learn that?  I think Dante's response would be: through the operations of language (which are automatic), and the power of language to create rhythms, sounds, images, "meanings", which vividly present alternative scenarios.  We become aware of other possible worlds by virtually creating them through language — our native tongue, music, mathematics, orthographic symbols, etc.  And what is the most powerful of these linguistic creators?  Poetry in our native tongue.  The whole of the Commedia is a kind of practical training in using the power of language to enter and respond in ways that allow us to "chose" the best case scenario when the evolutionary system of conditioning is failing, and leading us to interminably suffer, or go extinct.  This is what the shades in Hell have not learned, what the souls in Purgatory are learning, and what the spirits in Heaven have learned.   

All this is one way — and there must be others, for alternatives to work — to think about reason and impulse, and this would explain line 39: those who have let appetite subjugate reason are destined always to be slaves to impulse, even when that slavery causes them and others pain.  They are always at the effect of their environment, which is what Dante shows here, as the shades are whipped about by contrary winds.  

As we go through the three worlds presented in the Commedia, we shall see how reason deals with impulse, how it interferes and creates that pause, how it discovers the best or right or moral course of action, and how it then uses the evolutionary intelligence of the conditioned or learned response to automatically obey or respond to that best (most blessed) possible outcome.  Dante would have called that learning: obedience to God.  Blake simply said: The Imaginative Man is the true man — and that since all deities reside in the human breast, God is the impulse to live as God in God's world, and not as a perishable worm four score and ten years long.          

46  E come i gru van cantando lor lai,
47  faccendo in aere di sé lunga riga,
48  così vid' io venir, traendo guai,

49  ombre portate da la detta briga;
50  per ch'i' dissi: “Maestro, chi son quelle
51  genti che l'aura nera sì gastiga?”
46  And as the cranes go chanting forth their lays,
47  Making in air a long line of themselves,
48  So saw I coming, uttering lamentations,
49  Shadows borne onward by the aforesaid stress.
50  Whereupon said I: "Master, who are those
51  People, whom the black air so castigates?"
Like a master composer of music, Dante makes two subtle changes in the bird-trope, and the whole phrase takes on a different meaning and prepares us for what is happening next.  Why birds?  They're thought to be licentious.  Remember the line in Measure for Measure about the lecherous sparrows.  In this case, the starlings become cranes and instead of flocks driven chaotically about, the cranes form a single line, crying out as they fly.  Where have seen this crowd becoming a line before?  At the beginning of Canto IV where the crowds of the unbaptized become the single line of the four poets, and also at the beginning of this Canto where the dead line up for the satanic parody of their confession before Minos.  These birds are also a parody of angels, and perhaps since these are those who let their lust control them, the fact that they are in flight, seems to mirror that feeling of exhilaration that consumes people in the first throes of sexual passion.  But of course, these are not birds or angels, they are the shades of people, and the shades in this line are the distinguished — or should we say notorious — lustful.  So the parody of the distinguished shades in limbo continues here, but the fame of these shades is fomented by their negative characteristics.  The word guai rings its note again, like a leitmotif which keeps returning in different orchestral contexts and which alerts us to the fact that though things have changed, they echo what has gone before and perhaps foreshadow what is to come.  We should also be attentive to the air itself, it has gone from brown (twice mentioned) to black.  The geography in Hell is getting more intense, and worse.
52  “La prima di color di cui novelle
53  tu vuo' saper,” mi disse quelli allotta,
54  “fu imperadrice di molte favelle.

55  A vizio di lussuria fu sì rotta,
56  che libito fé licito in sua legge,
57  per tòrre il biasmo in che era condotta.

58  Ell' è Semiramìs, di cui si legge
59  che succedette a Nino e fu sua sposa:
60  tenne la terra che 'l Soldan corregge.

61  L'altra è colei che s'ancise amorosa,
62  e ruppe fede al cener di Sicheo;
63  poi è Cleopatràs lussurïosa.

64  Elena vedi, per cui tanto reo
65  tempo si volse, e vedi 'l grande Achille,
66  che con amore al fine combatteo.

67  Vedi Parìs, Tristano”; e più di mille
68  ombre mostrommi e nominommi a dito,
69  ch'amor di nostra vita dipartille.

70  Poscia ch'io ebbi 'l mio dottore udito
71  nomar le donne antiche e ' cavalieri,
72  pietà mi giunse, e fui quasi smarrito.

52  "The first of those, of whom intelligence
53  Thou fain wouldst have," then said he unto me,
54  "The empress was of many languages.

55  To sensual vices she was so abandoned,
56  That lustful she made licit in her law,
57  To remove the blame to which she had been led.

58  She is Semiramis, of whom we read
59  That she succeeded Ninus, and was his spouse;
60  She held the land which now the Sultan rules.

61  The next is she who killed herself for love,
62  And broke faith with the ashes of Sichaeus;
63  Then Cleopatra the voluptuous."

64  Helen I saw, for whom so many ruthless
65  Seasons revolved; and saw the great Achilles,
66  Who at the last hour combated with Love.

67  Paris I saw, Tristan; and more than a thousand
68  Shades did he name and point out with his finger,
69  Whom Love had separated from our life.

70  After that I had listened to my Teacher,
71  Naming the dames of eld and cavaliers,
72  Pity prevailed, and I was nigh bewildered.

This this lineage of the notorious lustful, there are nine figures.  They are grouped in threes.  The first three are 

Semiramis
Dido
Cleopatra

Not getting into Dante's sources, it's clear from the text that Dante attributed Simiramis, the first of these, to some association with Babylon, and with the tower of Babble, as Virgil says in line 54 that she was Empress of many languages (fu imperadrice di molte favelle).  Thus, she is associated with linguistic confusion, that is to say, our ability to understand one another.  She was a female sovereign who succeeded her husband, and while regent for her son — her husband's rightful heir — she retained power by passing a law which allowed her to marry her own son.  Thus, she was guilty of both usurpation and incest.  Her domain was where the current sultan rules.  Thus she is associated with infidels, the unfaithful, and with false religion.  Thus a blasphemer.  What the text does not elude to, but which have been common knowledge for Dante's contemporary readers who were familiar with his sources is that she was murdered by her son/spouse, in a sort of matriarchal version of the Oedipal myth.  Recall how in Canto IV Electra was the first name, who with her brother Orestes (echo of the incest theme only with siblings?), killed their mother Clytemnestra, in revenge for having killed their father, Agamemnon.  This legend Jung used to hypothesize an Electra complex, the girls desire to kill her mother in order to marry her father, this complex serving as a foil to the Oedipus Complex.  This echo of Electra in the same structural position as that of Electra is another example of Dante's extreme organizational fastidiousness, resonance after resonance is created, as if the entire Commedia were the interior of some kind of jewel whose facets reflect and refract the light of one another.  This list of the lustful also revives the refrain of "Vidi" (I saw), and the hear/see motif as Virgil explains first, then Dante sees.  I will say here, since I have so often maligned Longfellow's English translation, that he does a masterful job of translating line 56: che libito fé licito in sua legge as that lustful she made licit in her law, retaining all the alliterations which make the line so incestuously voluptuous with its three L's.  Giuseppe Mazzotta tells that this reference refers to the secular city which, in contrast to Saint Augustine's City of God, is founded on the lust — the lust for power, bodily lust, and violence — because in this secular city law and lust operate in tandem to corrupt the inhabitants.

The next in this first triplet is Dido.  Virgil does not mention her name, but since it was he who wrote her story in his Aeneid, he doesn't need to, and perhaps he is ashamed to, since it was his hero, Aeneas, who abandoned her, and for whose loss, she murdered herself.  The other reason that her name is not mentioned refers to a common device in Dante, called, periphrasis, that is, the omission of the name as in a riddle, which when solved by the readers tends to stand out in their minds with more vividness because it is they who have supplied the name, by answering the riddle.  We know why Dido merited this importance (as we earlier saw in Canto IV with Aristotle) because she is associated with Virgil, and because she is mentioned again in line 85, below, and is the only named entity there.  This affair, Virgil also condemns because Dido broke faith with the ashes of her deceased husband, Sichaeus, whose, power, like Semiramis, she assumed.  Now we see a motif developing.  Namely, that the figures here not only succumbed to lust, but that their weakness resulted in their deaths by murder or suicide.  Their affections were not just hurtful, they were fatal.

The last in this threesome is Cleopatra, whom as we know, placed the asp to her breast and committed suicide for the loss of Mark Antony.  She was a queen who inherited her power from her father, and along with her brother, whom she likely married, as it was an Egyptian custom, ruled as co-regents.  The brother and sister fell out, she killed him in battle, and she assumed sole sovereignty.  So, like Dido, and Semiramis, she was associated with usurpation, and like Semiramis, with incest. 

The next threesome is 

Helen
Achilles
Paris

All are associated with the Trojan War, that is to say, with Virgil, through his protagonist Aeneas.

Helen is an adulteress who caused the destruction of an Empire, and there is an account offered by Pausanias that Helen fled to Rhodes after the fall of Ilion, and was surprised while bathing by an enemy, and hung.  The explanatory line in the text is that she is one for whom so many ruthless seasons revolved.  So again we have the motif of a vortical movement.  Brilliant.

Next is Achilles, who fell in love with Polyxena, Paris' sister, and a Trojan princess.  If they married they could put an end to the war. When going to effect the marriage in a secret meeting, Paris, angered because the marriage would mean that he would have to surrender Helen, hid in the bushes and shot an arrow into Achilles' heel, killing him.  He is the first man in this list, but he is lured by a woman, and we will have more to say about this later.

Last in this group is Paris.  Bewitched by Helen's beauty, his abduction of her began the Trojan war, so that his lust was the cause of an Empire's death and of the deaths of many, his own father Priam and brother Hector included.  Paris is shown by Homer, whom Virgil knew, but whom Dante only knew through Virgil, as a coward and a lustpot.  He is killed in the war by Philoctetes.

The last grouping is 

Tristan 
Paolo
Francesca             

The last group of three are the most contemporary to Dante, and thus the latest in the lineage. Dante probably knew the work in a 12th Century romance, which was also the book that Paulo and Francesca were reading when they fell in love (the references to Launcelot in line 85 affirms this.  The point is that Tristan dies because of his illicit love, and so does his lover.  A summary of their end appears on the web site Infernopedia:

Tristan (Latin & Brythonic: Drustanus; Welsh: Trystan), also known as Tristram, was a Cornish knight in the service of his uncle, King Mark. Mark was betrothed to the princess of Ireland, the beautiful Iseult. As his most trusted knight, Tristan was sent to Ireland by Mark to bring Iseult to Cornwall to marry the king. To aid Iseult in her marriage, in her possession was a powerful love potion. Unfortunately, during a feast Tristan and Iseult accidentally consume the love potion and fall helplessly in love. The two become lovers, even after they arrive in Cornwall and Mark marries Iseult; they use trickery to fool Mark into believing nothing is going on. There are many variations of the legend's ending, but the more well-known ending, Mark finds out about the affair and tries to punish the couple, though Tristan escapes death by hanging and rescues Iseult from exile. He returns Iseult to Mark, then reconciles with the king by agreeing to leave Cornwall. Years later, Tristan is wounded by a poisoned spear and sends for Iseult to heal him. He requests that the sailor sent for her raise white sails if Iseult will come help him, and black sails if she refuses. Unable to rise, Tristan asks his wife what color the sails are, but the jealous woman lies to him, saying the sails are black. Tristan dies of grief, and when Iseult arrives and sees his corpse, she too drops dead of grief.

The story of the last two figures in this grouping is the subject of the second half of this Canto and comments will be reserved until those parts are examined.

But before we proceed.  Let's look at three more things: 

Why 9 nine lustfuls?  
Why are 6 of the 9 women?
What role does the medieval understanding of optics play in the role of eliciting lust?

The reader could go quite mad trying to track down all the significance of numbers in the Commedia.  Dante uses number both for the sake of establishing a degree of proportionality in relating one part of his narrative to another, and also for the purpose of evoking a deeper symbology to the content of his work.  Narrative is a line, like a melody in music.  How do you add depth to that line?  Through metaphor.  By referencing past events and foreshadowing future ones with sounds and images, the readers thoughts and emotions are constantly reminded, if only subconsciously, that although sequence is important, depth is important too, and the line of narrative becomes many lines, weaving themselves into an ever-thickening moiré of significance.  We saw how the number 40 pulsed below the poetry in the description of limbo in Canto IV, and now these 9 notorious exemplars of lust serve that same function here in Canto V.  Dante goes out of his way in the Vita Nuova to tell us that he first met Beatrice near the end of his 9th year and near the beginning of her 9th year.  He didn't say I was almost 10 and she was 8, he makes 9 the barycenter where their two orbits are synchronized, and in that same work, he goes out of his way several times to let us know that his reason never succumbed to the vileness of carnality.  No doubt so many references to Beatrice's purity has the effect of saying "why such an emphasis," if the spectre of lust was not ever present, and needed to be beaten down.  This is sublimation with a capital S, the sex impulse continually growing and having to be continually transformed into something else or it will overwhelm him.  What is this something else?  And how does the lover keep from being consumed by repression, which might be as bad or worse than being consumed by lust.  It is the release, the expression, of poetry.  If the word is made flesh, the flesh can be made word, and no one has been more successful at doing that than Dante.  As carnal as Beatrice is, from the very first she is spiritualized into poetry, and after her death, that spiritualization becomes more thorough and more powerful in its ability to transform Dante's own flesh into spirit.  Number is abstract, but it is fundamentally abstract, a type of language as basic as bone but as invulnerable to decay as prayer.

The last two questions, why so many women on the list? and what does this have to do with optics? are really focused around the power of the glance, the gaze.  The eyes for the troubadours, for Dante, and all the way through Shakespeare and beyond do not only receive light rays, but they emit them.  The eyes of women are phallic darts, which penetrate men with the radiance of love.  We will encounter many examples of this feminine power throughout Commedia, as we already have in Canto II, when Beatrice's eyes are described as the single guiding star which commands Virgil to intercede.  This poem from the Vita Nuova makes the point.  Here the power of looking, seeing, and being seen is most vividly described.

Love says of her: "How can a mortal body
achieve such beauty and such purity?"
He looks again and swears it must be true:
God does have something new in mind for earth.
Her color is the pallor of the pearl,
a paleness perfect for a gracious lady;
she is the best that nature can achieve
and by her mold all beaty tests itself;
her eyes, wherever she may choose to look,
send forth their spirits radiant with love
to strike the yes of anyone they meet,
and penetrate until they find the heart.
There where no one dares hold his gaze to long.

Dice di lei Amor: «Cosa mortale
come esser pò sì adorna e sì pura?»
Poi la reguarda, e fra se stesso giura
che Dio ne 'ntenda di far cosa nova.
Color di perle ha quasi in forma, quale
convene a donna aver, non for misura;
ella è quanto de ben pò far natura;
per esemplo di lei bieltà si prova.
De li occhi suoi, come ch'ella li mova,
escono spirti d'amore inflammati,
che fèron li occhi a qual che allor la guati,
e passan sì che 'l cor ciascun retrova:
voi le vedete Amor pinto nel viso,
là 've non pote alcun mirarla fiso.

It's pretty clear that Love — a male persona in Dante — has given the eyes of women the aggressive power of penetration, her gaze penetrates to the heart, but also no doubt to the genitals.  Its dart wounds helpless men, skewers their bodies with radiance, causes them to succumb to the madness of love.  It's a beautiful trope, but unfortunately it has had a very dark side in history, and would lead to the victimization of woman as witches in later centuries, with results that would have horrified Dante, and have made a mockery of his veneration.

In lines 70 - 72, Dante returns to the value of naming, and indicates that the feeling of pity has left him smarrito, translated here as bewildered.  And where have we heard this word before?  In the very first tercet of the entire Commedia.  We are now back at the beginning, lost and confused, and more than a little numb.  And what has driven us back to our starting point?  Pity.  Pity for all those, like Dante himself, who have been ravaged by love.  The tale of Paolo and Francesca — and Dante, the aspirant’s reaction to it — will later show us how Virgil's reason deals with pity in these circumstances — however in this Canto he remains silent.  The question which arises for us is: If love's dart wounds, how then does reason cauterize that wound? 

73  I' cominciai: “Poeta, volontieri
74  parlerei a que' due che 'nsieme vanno,
75  e paion sì al vento esser leggieri.”

76  Ed elli a me: “Vedrai quando saranno
77  più presso a noi; e tu allor li priega
78  per quello amor che i mena, ed ei verranno.”

79  Sì tosto come il vento a noi li piega,
80  mossi la voce: “O anime affannate,
81  venite a noi parlar, s'altri nol niega!”
 
82  Quali colombe dal disio chiamate
83  con l'ali alzate e ferme al dolce nido
84  vegnon per l'aere, dal voler portate;

85  cotali uscir de la schiera ov' è Dido,
86  a noi venendo per l'aere maligno,
87  sì forte fu l'affettüoso grido.

73  And I began: "O Poet, willingly
74  Speak would I to those two, who go together,
75  And seem upon the wind to be so light."

76  And, he to me: "Thou'lt mark, when they shall be
77  Nearer to us; and then do thou implore them
78  By love which leadeth them, and they will come."

79  Soon as the wind in our direction sways them,
80  My voice uplift I: "O ye weary souls!
81  Come speak to us, if no one interdicts it."

82  As turtle-doves, called onward by desire,
83  With open and steady wings to the sweet nest
84  Fly through the air by their volition borne,

85  So came they from the band where Dido is,
86  Approaching us athwart the air malign,
87  So strong was the affectionate appeal.

Dante sees two together, and would willingly (voluntiere) speak to them — he makes a point of that voluntiere.  His is an act of will, which is to say, unlike the two he sees who are so light that they are buffeted about together, against their will, he is choosing, reasonably choosing, to hear their story, as the reader is, through an act of volition, of will, choosing to hear Dante's story.  Caught in the throes of an impulse, in this case of sex, which the text refers to again and again as amore, as love, the ones to whom Dante would speak are helpless in their attraction for one another, in spite of the ceaseless punishment it brings them.  And here is a curious thing.  Are we to believe that these helpless creatures, yet have enough power of will to speak to Dante, a living soul, and what's more, do they want to speak to him, do they will to speak to him? and is there nothing to prevent them from doing so?  At this point, we can't answer these questions, but we read further down in line 96 that this incessant wind of their sexual desire has calmed, which is to say that when they begin to confess to an understanding ear, the ear of one who pities, things begin to calm down.  But is this calm induced by pity for their state the kind of calm which will cure them?  The answer to that question cannot be given, until we, the readers, have also pitied, that is to say, until we have read of the plight of these lovers.  

On a language note, listen to how the word leggieri, with its L sound, recalls the triple alliteration of libito, licito, legge in line 56, and how closely this world meaning light, i.e., not heavy, resembles the word for read — leggere — this association implies that the reader, once he or she has chosen voluntarily to read, is as one caught in the wind of the writer's obsessions, and buffeted about by forces which the text conjures forth.  Is this a legitimate interpretation?  I think so, because as Francesca describes how reading led her to surrender her will, and plummet into passion, it is reading — a certain kind of reading —  that has enticed her.  Virgil's words are telling here, for in lines 78 - 79 he says, do thou implore them/ By the love which leadeth them, and they will come ( tu allor li priega/ per quello amor che i mena, ed ei verranno).  In short, the word love to these two is the trigger to what seems like an hypnotic induction.  That word conjures their willless obedience.  Which leaves us to ponder another question: Is the confession that is to follow only a recapitulation of the confession they had previously made to Minos?  And does Dante now stand in for Minos as father confessor?  Dante speaks, and they come.  Is this an act of volition or just another instance of their obsession?  

Now with the metaphor comparing the two to turtle doves (columbe), we come to the third bird trope of this Canto, the progression being flocks of starlings, line of cranes, and now pair of doves.  And this evolution of tropes, while perhaps appearing as a move towards transcendence, still remains the same, and still implies that from the general to the infamous to the particular, the same passion rules, and the same result ensues.  Also, in case the reader missed the reference to Dido in the previous lines, here she is explicitly named.

Note 1: Line 80 which uses the adjective affannate to describe these souls is an echo of line 22 in Canto 1 of affannata, and would be better translated as breathless, than weary.  So Dante is comparing the breathlessness of these lovers to the breathlessness of a man who has just managed to save himself from drowning.  The kind of love we see in this Canto is a sea of drowning emotions and impulsive actions, which deprive its victims of the very breath of life.  Note too how by using a reiteration of this one adjective (up to now only occurring in these two places), Dante is able to make a metaphor that throws a long arc from one section of the work to another, causing the work to grow deeper and deeper by multiplying resonances.  We saw this just before in the word smarrito, and we will see it again and again throughout the entire Commedia.   

Note 2: The translation of appeal here for grido in line 87 obscures the desperation in this affectionate (l'affettüoso) utterance.  It is not an appeal, it is a cry, and the fact that it is, establishes the emotional tone of the passage, and emphasizes its erotic turbulence.  

88  “O animal grazïoso e benigno
89  che visitando vai per l'aere perso
90  noi che tignemmo il mondo di sanguigno,

91  se fosse amico il re de l'universo,
92  noi pregheremmo lui de la tua pace,
93  poi c'hai pietà del nostro mal perverso.

94  Di quel che udire e che parlar vi piace,
95  noi udiremo e parleremo a voi,
96  mentre che 'l vento, come fa, ci tace.

88  "O living creature gracious and benignant,
89  Who visiting goest through the purple air
90  Us, who have stained the world incarnadine,

91  If were the King of the Universe our friend,
92  We would pray unto him to give thee peace,
93  Since thou hast pity on our woe perverse.

94  Of what it pleases thee to hear and speak,
95  That will we hear, and we will speak to you,
96  While silent is the wind, as it is now.

These lines remind me of what Blake said about Rousseau: These are not confessions, they're boasts.  And Francesca’s words here, although they affect the protagonist Dante, and seem confessional, even submissive, in fact ... well what they are in fact is the lesson of the entire rest of this Canto.  Suffice it to say for now that Frencesca's speech is self-pitying and is designed to elicit pity.  I think it's significant that she addresses Dante “O animal grazïoso e benigno," not using the word persone, which would mean person, but animal, which has connotations of something alive — the quick — something animal-like or bestial, and also a shade, a ghost (anima).  She calls Dante gracious and benignant, someone who has received grace and blessings, and as such, perhaps someone who might also be able to bestow those boons.  She is definitely looking for a father confessor, but she has a very sly way of doing it — being as she is obsequious instead or remorseful.  It is almost as if she is seeking, by manipulating Dante to pity her, not absolution for her actions, but a co-conspirator.  And although she admits that her behavior was a perverse disease, stained the world with blood, and alienated her from the King of the Universe, all of this can be forgiven because — as Dante or anyone who has felt the way she feels can attest — love is a kind of madness.  The nature of love is that it drives us out of our minds, and when we are not in our right minds, we are not really culpable.  A close reading of her opinion of God will show that she relegates Him to the status of "friend", and this is a telltale sign of how she holds the judgements of the King of the Universe, since a "friend" is a far cry from a lover.  There is no question that between these two — her friend, God, and her lover Paolo —  that it is her lover whom she seeks to please, not God. 

In line 94, she says if it would give Dante pleasure, she will hear and speak, but what the following lines reveal is that she does not really want to hear, she wants to be heard, and she finds the silence of Dante's and Virgil's presence an apt opportunity to work her whiles.

97  Siede la terra dove nata fui
98  su la marina dove 'l Po discende
99  per aver pace co' seguaci sui.

100  Amor, ch'al cor gentil ratto s'apprende,
101  prese costui de la bella persona
102  che mi fu tolta; e 'l modo ancor m'offende.

103  Amor, ch'a nullo amato amar perdona,
104  mi prese del costui piacer sì forte,
105  che, come vedi, ancor non m'abbandona.

106  Amor condusse noi ad una morte.
107  Caina attende chi a vita ci spense.”
108  Queste parole da lor ci fuor porte.

97  Sitteth the city, wherein I was born,
98  Upon the sea-shore where the Po descends
99  To rest in peace with all his retinue.

100  Love, that on gentle heart doth swiftly seize,
101  Seized this man for the person beautiful
102  That was ta'en from me, and still the mode offends me.

103  Love, that exempts no one beloved from loving,
104  Seized me with pleasure of this man so strongly,
105  That, as thou seest, it doth not yet desert me;

106  Love has conducted us unto one death;
107  Caina waiteth him who quenched our life!"
108  These words were borne along from them to us.

One of the many fascinating things that Dante has mastered in his style, is how to give even what might be in lesser hands a mere bit of information, a sense of life and movement that reinforces the life and movement of the whole poem.  In lines 97 - 98, when Francesca tells of where she was born, she does so by describing the Po as a place where the turbulence of its tributaries find peace.  As stated before, Dante weaves the threads of geography, history, myth, philosophy, lessons on style, moral precepts, scripture, and natural phenomenon into a single pattern, weaving and reweaving his metaphors and motifs until they have depth and movement, and until reading and re-reading his poem confers on his audience a similar feeling of depth and movement.  What Francesca is seeking here is peace, as she had when she was born and baptized, as she had when she was presumably innocent of sin.  And what follows here with a litany of phrases each beginning with the word love, amor, are her excuses as to how she has been deprived of that place of peace which fostered her engendering.  The metaphor of the Po in conjunction with the word nato (born) also points to the legitimate expression of sexual appetite: It leads to birth, and is not just a pleasurable indulgence.  All this text from lines 97 - 108 shows what the writer Dante knows, and what the aspirant Dante does not know.  Namely: What love is, and how the sexual urge either sanctifies or perverts its expression.

The Buddhists have a doctrine referred to as near poisons.  Recklessness, for example, is the near poison of courage, vanity the near poison of self-respect, and so forth.  The love that Francesca says was and is her ruin, is the very near poison of what Dante feels for Beatrice, which in some part explains Dante's reaction to her story.  She is telling him in effect: everybody who feels this kind of love is damned, and particularly those with gentle rapidly palpitating hearts ( ch'al cor ratto).  Note the association with birds, which also have rapidly beating hearts, and which also are beautiful and licentious.  Her blaming also continues here.  Love has ensnared her with this beautiful person, who bewitched her in life, and who continues to bewitch her after death.  Anyone who has read Dante's Vita Nuova can see how near a poison this is to the poet's bewitchment by Beatrice.  She quotes him.  Ever the seductress and seduced, again Francesca in line 104 uses the word piacer, (to give pleasure), the same word she used to coax Dante into listening to her story in line 94: Di quel che udire e che parlar vi piace. Francesca makes it clear that her attraction — an attraction to beauty, to appearance, and not to some inner virtue of her beloved — has yet to abandon her.  Love, her kind of love, clandestine, adulterous, sterile physical love, continues to torment her.  And she continues to blaspheme Love as an entity separate from herself by whom she is enslaved.  Just as Dante did in the Vita Nuova.  Francesca is obedient to impulse, and all of her reasoning is only a kind circuitous attempt to escape her responsibility to control that impulse and put it to some good use.  

There are four repetitions of the word amor in her speech, but one is hidden, as was her love.  Where is it hidden?  In a visual pun in line 106: ad unA MORte.  And the three rhymed words?  forte (strong), morte (death), porte (carry).  Her kind of love was a potency which carried her and her lover to a bloody death at the hands of her husband.  But all this is mere prelude, told I think to color Dante's bias against her husband and against the Divine judgement which has condemned her.  In line 107 she tells Dante that he will find her murderer in Caina, which is the first part of the 9th circle of Hell. 

One note further before continuing.  In line 108, the text reads: Queste parole da lor ci fuor porte (these words were borne along from them to us).  For Dante the reader, or in this case the listener, the words are almost physical, and seem to be like projectiles, like the darts of the wounding gaze we saw before, and they assault or penetrate their recipients, almost against their will.  It is a kind of listening or reading that Francesca's words will imply, and this says much about how the reader of the Commedia should not approach the text.  In Hell the moral exemplars are cautionary warnings.               

109  Quand' io intesi quell' anime offense,
110  china' il viso, e tanto il tenni basso,
111  fin che 'l poeta mi disse: “Che pense?”

112  Quando rispuosi, cominciai: “Oh lasso,
113  quanti dolci pensier, quanto disio
114  menò costoro al doloroso passo!”

115  Poi mi rivolsi a loro e parla' io,
116  e cominciai: “Francesca, i tuoi martìri
117  a lagrimar mi fanno tristo e pio.

118  Ma dimmi: al tempo d'i dolci sospiri,
119  a che e come concedette amore
120  che conosceste i dubbiosi disiri?”

121  E quella a me: “Nessun maggior dolore
122  che ricordarsi del tempo felice
123  ne la miseria; e ciò sa 'l tuo dottore.

124  Ma s'a conoscer la prima radice
125  del nostro amor tu hai cotanto affetto,
126  dirò come colui che piange e dice


109  As soon as I had heard those souls tormented,
110  I bowed my face, and so long held it down
111  Until the Poet said to me: "What thinkest?"

112  When I made answer, I began: "Alas!
113  How many pleasant thoughts, how much desire,
114  Conducted these unto the dolorous pass!"

115  Then unto them I turned me, and I spake,
116  And I began: "Thine agonies, Francesca,
117  Sad and compassionate to weeping make me.

118  But tell me, at the time of those sweet sighs,
119  By what and in what manner Love conceded,
120  That you should know your dubious desires?"

121  And she to me: "There is no greater sorrow
122  Than to be mindful of the happy time
123  In misery, and that thy Teacher knows.

124  But, if to recognise the earliest root
125  Of love in us thou hast so great desire,
126  I will do even as he who weeps and speaks.


In these lines from 109 - 126, there is a curious double switch.  Virgil questions Dante in line 111, after seeing his charge drop his head at Francesca's words, instead of Dante questioning Virgil.  His student is falling into his old errors, his old torpor of brooding and lack of discernment.  Virgil asks "Che pense?"  What are you thinking?  And Dante speaks, but is he answering Virgil, or Francesca?  "How many pleasant thoughts, how much desire / conducted these (Paolo and Francesca) unto the dolorous pass (quanti dolci pensier, quanto disio / menò costoro al doloroso passo!”).  Now the second switch: instead of turning to Virgil to answer his doubts, he turns to Francesca, and questions her.  Francesca has seduced him to turn from his teacher, and to listen to her story.  Dante, the aspirant has abandoned reason for the passion of emotion, and in doing so, he has opened once again the door that leads to coma.  He speaks of dolci sospiri (sweet sighs), and just as Dante has told us in the Vita Nuova how he first came to be enamored of Beatrice, he asks Francesca to tell him how it was that she came to be enthralled by these dubious desires (i dubbiosi disiri).  Then in a direct parody of the phrase Ed' elli a me (and he to me), which we have read so many times, we read: E quella a me (and she to me).  What we read should shock us.  Again, directing Dante's attention to her own emotions, Francesca says "There is no greater sorrow / than to be mindful of the happy time / in misery " (Nessun maggior dolore / che recordarsi del tempo feliice / ne la miseria).  And then, in what should be an outrageous affront to Dante, but it isn't, she tries to rope in Virgil as well, saying, as your teacher knows, supposing that since Virgil is a shade in Hell, like herself, he must also share her feelings.  How can Virgil answer this?  With silence.  The lesson that Dante has to learn will be harsher and more penetrating than any Virgil might give.  And it will be a lesson brought home with the pain of pity, not pity as Beatrice told us was her blessed concern in Canto II, but pity tainted with self-pity, pity that has allowed itself to be tainted by that which is pitiful.  If we are attentive here, we will also read in Francesca's sorrow at retelling her story, a parody of the lines in Canto I when Dante says that to retell his story is to relive his fear, but he will do so in order to tell of the good he has seen.  Dante, even at the beginning, is thinking how he may help others, but Francesca is still trying elicit pity from others by say that she will speak even as one who weeps while speaking (dirò come colui che piange e dice).

127  Noi leggiavamo un giorno per diletto
128  di Lancialotto come amor lo strinse;
129  soli eravamo e sanza alcun sospetto.

130  Per più fïate li occhi ci sospinse
131  quella lettura, e scolorocci il viso;
132  ma solo un punto fu quel che ci vinse.

133 Quando leggemmo il disïato riso
134  esser basciato da cotanto amante,
135  questi, che mai da me non fia diviso,

136  la bocca mi basciò tutto tremante.
137  Galeotto fu 'l libro e chi lo scrisse:
138  quel giorno più non vi leggemmo avante.”

127  One day we reading were for our delight
128  Of Launcelot, how Love did him enthral.
129  Alone we were and without any fear.

130  Full many a time our eyes together drew
131  That reading, and drove the colour from our faces;
132  But one point only was it that o'ercame us.

133  When as we read of the much-longed-for smile
134  Being by such a noble lover kissed,
135  This one, who ne'er from me shall be divided,

136  Kissed me upon the mouth all palpitating.
137  Galeotto was the book and he who wrote it.
138  That day no farther did we read therein."

In the common phrase "we read for edification and delight", we notice that edification comes first, and the delight arises from that edification.  This is the way I think that Dante intends us to read the Commedia, and this kind of reading demands a commitment to interpret, to engage in exegesis, to do what we are doing here as we try to discover the deepest significance of this text for ourselves and others.  But in Francesca's account, she skips edification and says that she and Paolo are reading for their delight (per diletto).  At this point, what they are doing is looking at pornography, monkey see, monkey do, and they imitate the actions of the text.  Dante goes out of his way here to tell us that the text is about and was written by (the author and protagonist the same, as they are in the Commedia) one Galeotto (known more familiarly to us as Galahaut, or Galahad).  It is an Arthurian romance which was probably circulating in Italy in the 13th century.  Lancelot is betraying his king, his fidelity oaths, and is engaging in adultery with his Lord's queen.  It's clear that Dante, the poet, is pointing out to us that this way of reading can lead to a moral debacle.  It weakens the reason and the will, and like those people who confuse soap opera performances for the acts of real people, and fall in love with them or try to injure them, or like those children who dress up as superheroes and jump off the house, Paolo and Francesco become the characters in a book.  But unlike the characters in a book, Francesco has a real husband who murders the both of them.  This is the tragedy of the fundamentalist Christian or Muslim who reads scripture as if God were a combination journalist and traffic cop and not the poet whose word creates worlds.  And just to be clear, this kind of fundamentalist reading is also indulged in by people who read books written by neuroscientists or doctors about how their brains determine their actions and feelings, or by nutritionists about how their diet influences them.  They too surrender their volition, their souls, to the influence of reading, and begin to proselytize and worship unthinkingly.  So, it's easy to see how pornographic this really is, how paralyzing it is to the intellect, and how poisonous to discerning action.  I think that when Dante insists on the literal truth of his journey, that what he means by "literal" is literary, not actual. 

Paolo and Francesca eyes meet as they read together, and they exchange those wounding darts, and then down their gazes drop, down to the mouth.  If the eyes are the windows of the soul, then the mouth is the voice of the soul.  But as one commentator has said, the mouth is veiled, that is, it can allegorize, flatter, or even lie — and in this case — it can kiss.  Trembling — this recalls the breathless palpitation in which all of this exposition takes place —  Paolo and Francesca, enthralled through the eyes by the words in the book, kiss.  And this brings up a curious, rather Borgesian thought: Is the book watching us, and imparting the same kind of influence as those darting eyes?  Well, in my case, reading Dante, this seems to be happening.  Paramahansa Yogananda says "God is always watching you, that's why you change."  When we read the Commedia, we get the same feeling that Rilke got upon viewing the Elgin marbles: You must change your life.   

139  Mentre che l'uno spirto questo disse,
140  l'altro piangëa; sì che di pietade
141  io venni men così com' io morisse.

142  E caddi come corpo morto cade.

139  And all the while one spirit uttered this,
140  The other one did weep so, that, for pity,
141  I swooned away as if I had been dying,

142  And fell, even as a dead body falls.

For pity, the aspirant Dante falls into a coma, and in a line rife with alliteration, the poet Dante collapses the curtain on this Canto.

Canto VI
1  Al tornar de la mente, che si chiuse
2  dinanzi a la pietà d'i due cognati,
3  che di trestizia tutto mi confuse,

4  novi tormenti e novi tormentati
5  mi veggio intorno, come ch'io mi mova
6  e ch'io mi volga, e come che io guati.

1  At the return of consciousness, that closed
2  before the pity of those two relations,
3  Which utterly with sadness had confused me,

4  New torments I behold, and new tormented
5  Around me, whichsoever way I move,
6  And whichsoever way I turn, and gaze.

These first 6 lines are a bridge from the previous Canto, and the verb tornare, suggest a return as from a distant place — Dante, the aspirant, was far gone in his pity-coma, once again returning to his state of physical and moral unconsciousness.   Pity has deprived him of all discernment, either physical or moral,  and he awakes from confusion.  Note the linkage of confuse and cognate — confuse etymologically from Latin meaning a mixing, a blending, to pour together, a disorder, a confusion, a shame, to that of cognate — together in birth, that is to say siblings.  This is Dante, the poet's, judgement against Dante, the aspirant.  Paola and Francesca are cognate — the word for in-laws, i.e., brother and sister in-law, and this compounds their sin from simple adultery, to adultery compounded in its egregiousness by incest.  Dante, the aspirant, confused by pity, cannot see this, hence his coma.  Like a drunk, suffering a black-out, he cannot remember how he got where he is.  Again we have here a turning, twisting motion, and as we will later learn, Dante in hell is always turning left, counterclockwise, following this auger of increasing torment as it drills down to the pit of hell.  Turning round and round he sees the torment and the tormented — torment: from a root meaning to twist, twisting.  By the aspirant's motion, we see that he has internalized the very shape of hell.  Guati, in line 6, translated as gaze, is to look with intensity.  It is interesting to note that in this case, which differs from what we have read before in the hear/see tropes, Dante, the aspirant, does not hear first, but he sees, which suggests that pity has deprived him of hearing, and we recall that Virgil, the voice of reason, in the previous Canto, was silent, did not speak, and was not heard.  If this is so, then the chiuse, the closing of the senses, referred to in line 1, suggests that there was something voluntary about Dante's coma.  He closed his ears to reason, and to an adultery and incest that led to murder, and when he comes to, he sees torment, but is still deaf to reason.  Certainly a reversal, a turning in the wrong way — counterclockwise — contra natura, against nature, which in an ironical way is what Jung would have called consciousness itself, since all of nature winds on without any moral sense, and only man, conscious, as Dante would have said, of sin, can transgress against his own being.  With conscience, humans can hear what has not been sounded, see what has not been shown.  That is to say, conscience has something unnatural about it.  And what is that something?  Imagination.  I admit, this is twisted logic, but that's where we are now in our reading, going down and down, against nature, to deeper, more tormenting insights.        

7  Io sono al terzo cerchio, de la piova
8  etterna, maladetta, fredda e greve;
9  regola e qualità mai non l' è nova.

10  Grandine grossa, acqua tinta e neve
11  per l'aere tenebroso si riversa;
12  pute la terra che questo riceve.

7  In the third circle am I of the rain
8  Eternal, maledict, and cold, and heavy;
9  Its law and quality are never new.

10  Huge hail, and water sombre-hued, and snow,
11  Athwart the tenebrous air pour down amain;
12  Noisome the earth is, that receiveth this.

These next two tercets are what filmmakers would call a framing shot; they show where the characters are, and where we are as readers: the third circle of hell.  There is a meteorological logic about this.  In the previous Canto, there was wind, now comes the storm.  And what a storm it is! — eternal, maledict, cold, heavy rain, and since rain bears the suggestion of refreshment, Dante, the poet, is careful in line 9 to say that this rain has none of that, by telling us that its law and quality are never new: never.  This storm has every bad quality: huge hail, dark water and snow, and plus it stinks, and makes the earth stink as it pelts it.  One could write a very interesting essay on the senses of the shades in hell, those souls who seem to feel, see, hear, taste, and smell, and yet have no sense organs by which to perceive these things.  In brief, they resemble people in a nightmare, asleep, and yet awake in their inner world with dream senses, while their waking senses are turned off — an involuntary imagination, very like, and yet profoundly different too, from the imagination which a poet like Dante must turn on in order to do his work.  I believe that Dante, like Blake, was what Northrup Frye called "a literalist of the imagination".  That is, what happens in the imagination, is not only real, but maybe even more real than that which is merely part of the "vegetable" (to use another Blake term) body.  I don't think Dante would have disagreed with Blake's dictums: "The imaginative man is the true man" — or — "the imagination is nature itself." 

13  Cerbero, fiera crudele e diversa,
14  con tre gole caninamente latra
15  sovra la gente che quivi è sommersa.

16  Li occhi ha vermigli, la barba unta e atra,
17  e 'l ventre largo, e unghiate le mani;
18  graffia li spirti ed iscoia ed isquatra.

19  Urlar li fa la pioggia come cani;
20  de l'un de' lati fanno a l'altro schermo;
21  volgonsi spesso i miseri profani.

22  Quando ci scorse Cerbero, il gran vermo,
23  le bocche aperse e mostrocci le sanne;
24  non avea membro che tenesse fermo.

13  Cerberus, monster cruel and uncouth,
14  With his three gullets like a dog is barking
15  Over the people that are there submerged.
16  Red eyes he has, and unctuous beard and black,
17  And belly large, and armed with claws his hands;
18  He rends the spirits, flays, and quarters them.
19  Howl the rain maketh them like unto dogs;
20  One side they make a shelter for the other;
21  Oft turn themselves the wretched reprobates.
22  When Cerberus perceived us, the great worm!
23  His mouths he opened, and displayed his tusks;
24  Not a limb had he that was motionless.
The description of Cerberus is the most monstrous of the three guardians which we have met so far.  Charon was more or less a cruel human shape, Minos, a human with a python like extended caudal vertebrae, and now Cerberus, an absolute monster, cruel (crudele) as we might expect, but also diversa, because he has three heads, and because he is strangely composed of mixed up parts.  Cerberus is another conglomeration, like the centaur, the gryphon, the sphinx or like medusa — the kinds of being which are mushed unnaturally into monstrous shapes from two or more creatures.  The Greeks call these types of beings 'callicantzari'.  They are not atypical kinds of nightmare entities, although sometimes we see them alternating their forms as in the wolfman, or the vampire, who change from human to animal shape under certain circumstances.  Often, as with Cerberus, the more diverse the parts, the more monstrous the being.  Cerberus has no reasoning power at all, he is pure instinctual appetite, and he feeds on filth.  His three heads give him three mouths, so that he is a fitting monster to torment those who have succumbed to gluttony to a ruinous degree.  Cerberus is also inhuman, a violation of the human shape, which is what gluttony does too, when obesity destroys the normal human shape through excessive indulgence.  Cerberus is dog-like in that he barks, but the text is careful not to call him a dog, only caninamente latra (barking like a dog), and the text merges him with the tormented gluttons, who when pelted howl like dogs  (come cani).  His three gullets (tre gole) suggest a defile (una gola), one synonym for which is stretta, — something that grips, clutches, grasps, squeezes.  He has a beard like a goat — greasy and somber — unta and atra, talons like a raptor's afixed to human-like hands, tusks (sanne or zanne) like a boar, and a belly like a pig.  He has vermilion eyes — not red, not rosa, but vermigli, and this word recalls the vermilion flash of lightning that we saw at the end of Canto III, and which knocked the aspirant back into a coma.  Finally, and perhaps most tellingly, he is called il gran vermo, the great worm — because he feeds on offal, because he is wormlike in the sense that he is squirmy, and because he resembles the serpent who decieved Eve.  He cannot hold still (non avea membro che tenesso fermo).  A monstrous entity indeed! which flays (iscoia) and quarters (isquatra) the souls of the gluttons who are constantly turning from one side to the other to shield the buried side from his predations, and from the gross stuff that is always pummeling them, like some diobolic manna which falls, not for nournishment but for a punishment.  Everything here is mixed up, the body of Cerberus, as well as the rain/hail/snow that is falling from the sky.  Everything is like partially digested food, which has grown fecaloid and rancid. 

25  E 'l duca mio distese le sue spanne,
26  prese la terra, e con piene le pugna
27  la gittò dentro a le bramose canne.

28  Qual è quel cane ch'abbaiando agogna,
29  e si racqueta poi che 'l pasto morde,
30  ché solo a divorarlo intende e pugna,

31  cotai si fecer quelle facce lorde
32  de lo demonio Cerbero, che 'ntrona
33  l'anime sì, ch'esser vorrebber sorde.

25  And my Conductor, with his spans extended,
26  Took of the earth, and with his fists well filled,
27  He threw it into those rapacious gullets.

28  Such as that dog is, who by barking craves,
29  And quiet grows soon as his food he gnaws,
30  For to devour it he but thinks and struggles,

31  The like became those muzzles filth-begrimed
32  Of Cerberus the demon, who so thunders
33  Over the souls that they would fain be deaf.

As we saw a parody of confession in Canto V, here we see a parody of communion, as Virgil, spreading his wings like an avenging angel throws gobs of filth into the three mouths of Cerberus.  See also Genesis 3:14, where God, to punish the serpent for deceiving Eve, decrees to that other great worm: "Dust thou shalt eat all the days of thy life."  This act quiets Cerberus, who like the gluttons he torments, when offered food, even the food of filth, he does not stop to think about what he is eating, but chokes it down regardless of how noxious and toxic to him it might be.  Perhaps, inadvertently here, to secure their own safe passage, Virgil has also provided some temporary respite to the gluttons, since rather than hear the thunderous barking of Cerberus, they would prefer to be deaf.  Or, just as likely — and the two readings are not mutually exclusive — this would refer to how those in the grip of an impulse which has become their most consuming obsession, the gluttons would prefer to be deaf rather than hear all the warnings that are thundering against their transgressions.  Boccaccio read this bellowing as antithetical to music played at banquets, and we may think with some bemusement that restaurateurs often play music that will make their patrons eat more and eat faster.

34  Noi passavam su per l'ombre che adona
35  la greve pioggia, e ponavam le piante
36  sovra lor vanità che par persona.

37  Elle giacean per terra tutte quante,
38  fuor d'una ch'a seder si levò, ratto
39  ch'ella ci vide passarsi davante.

37  They all were lying prone upon the earth,
38  Excepting one, who sat upright as soon
39  As he beheld us passing on before him.

Dante and Virgil take a slip-slide walk here, proceeding over shadows beaten down by the heavy rain, placing their feet (le piante, understood here as piede = feet), atop those vanities which seemed like people.  Nicola Fosca, a contemporary Italian commentator, argues that in some instances this vanità (vanity) = inconsistenza (inconstancy, inconsistancy) which would make the lines seem as if the shades did not provide firm footing, a reading which, given the general slime of the place, and the constant evil percipitation, would be quite justified.  This reading would also echo what the text says about Cerberus, non avea membro che tenesse fermo (not a limb holds firm).  Walking on soaked inconstant shadow which only seemed to be people would be quite slippery indeed.  All are lying down, but one sits up as the poets pass.

40  “O tu che se' per questo 'nferno tratto,”
41  mi disse, “riconoscimi, se sai:
42  tu fosti, prima ch'io disfatto, fatto.”

43  E io a lui: “L'angoscia che tu hai
44  forse ti tira fuor de la mia mente,
45  sì che non par ch'i' ti vedessi mai.

46  Ma dimmi chi tu se' che 'n sì dolente
47  loco se' messo, e hai sì fatta pena,
48  che, s'altra è maggio, nulla è sì spiacente.” 

49  Ed elli a me: “La tua città, ch'è piena
50  d'invidia sì che già trabocca il sacco,
51  seco mi tenne in la vita serena.

52  Voi cittadini mi chiamaste Ciacco:
53  per la dannosa colpa de la gola,
54  come tu vedi, a la pioggia mi fiacco.

55  E io anima trista non son sola,
56  ché tutte queste a simil pena stanno
57  per simil colpa.” E più non fé parola.

40  "O thou that art conducted through this Hell,"
41  He said to me, "recall me, if thou canst;
42  Thyself wast made before I was unmade."

43  And I to him: "The anguish which thou hast
44  Perhaps doth draw thee out of my remembrance,
45  So that it seems not I have ever seen thee.

46  But tell me who thou art, that in so doleful
47  A place art put, and in such punishment,
48  If some are greater, none is so displeasing."

49  And he to me: "Thy city, which is full
50  Of envy so that now the sack runs over,
51  Held me within it in the life serene.

52  You citizens were wont to call me Ciacco;
53  For the pernicious sin of gluttony
54  I, as thou seest, am battered by this rain.

55  And I, sad soul, am not the only one,
56  For all these suffer the like penalty
57  For the like sin;" and word no more spake he.

These lines — from 40 to 57 — address the question of identity and it's concomitant issue: recognition.  Who are you?  How do you recognize yourself or others?  What makes you you, and by so doing separates you from the mass of others? and makes you an identity, not a generalized conglomeration.  Because whoever has popped out of this ordure, whose punishment, as the aspirant tells him in lines 47 - 48, may not be the worst, but is the most displeasing, he has certainly differentiated himself from the mass.  And although the aspirant does not recognize him, he recognizes Dante, and he also recognizes himself, defines himself, names himself, and even betrays himself, both in what he says about himself, and in what he glosses over or omits to say about himself.  Commentators for eight centuries have been trying to figure out who this might be, and if he were an historical figure from Florence, a person that Dante knew, as the shade himself implies when he asks Dante if he remembers him (riconoscimi).  The text in a very clever turn of phrase jambs the words unmade (disfatto) and made (fatto) together as way of illustrating that Dante and this person whom Dante does not recognize, the mystery persona's anguish having so altered his appearance, had a very close association.  In political circles — and this is what we are dealing with here — the polity, the polis, when a close associate falls into disgrace, his erstwhile friends, as is said, 'begin to distance themselves from him.'  The aspirant denies the association, is, or plays dumb, and in so doing the text uses the word mente, the same word that was used at the beginning of the Canto as the aspirant begins to recover his senses from his pity-swoon following his seduction by Francesca.  Who are you?  Are you your body?  Your habits?  Your moral choices?  Are you your social position?  Your lineage?  The parent of someone? the child of someone?  Are you your knowledge and experience?  your accomplishments or lack thereof?  Are you a product of your environment?  Are you the citizen of a country or city — an American, an Italian, a Florentine?  Are you your name, you epithet, your nickname?  This shade has distinguished himself from the other gluttons who lie undistinguished in this field of noisome waste by sitting up, by recognizing the aspirant, in short he sees the aspirant.  The glutton has separated himself from the vulgar mass — and we remember that such an act is what separated Beatrice from the ladies with whom the young Dante first saw her, and also what Beatrice says is what merited Dante for the special dispensation of hers, of Saint Lucy's, and of the Queen of Heaven's mercy.  The reader might also recall that Saint Lucy, whose name means light, was martyred by having her eyes removed, and it is sight, or lack of it, in this glutton, will be seen to be an important detail at the end of his discourse.   Francesca tried to seduce and deceive Dante by quoting his own words from the Vita Nuova, and of claiming that like Dante himself, in his feelings for Beatrice, she and Paolo, were also driven to their action by love.  Ciacco, the Hog, as the shade names himself, referring to his own epithet, only fleeting admits his damaging sin of gluttony (la dennosa colpa di gola), and instead concentrates on incurring Dante's sympathy by claiming their association as two citizens of Florence — recall the ingratiating phrase of politicians who seek our  assent: 'My fellow Americans.'   This ploy works too, as we shall see as we proceed in the text.   Dante, the aspirant, is indeed seduced, asks nothing about gluttony — except as we see tangentially, by way of vague insinuation.  Ciacco may be a glutton, may have been branded a glutton by his fellow citizens, but that is not what interests Dante about him, that is not what distinguishes him, and gives him a special identity from the general mass of gluttons.  What distinguishes him in his own eyes is his political taste, his tongue's ability to bitterly savor the sins of the two fellow Florentine's fellow citizens, and his ability to denounce them.  A glutton will eat like a horse that founders.  He will eat until the sack of his belly splits, and thus the glutton Ciacco says that the city of Florence is a sack that splits and spills the chankings of envy, which has in a sense deprived him of his society dinners, his ability to indulge in la vita dolce, their discord spoiling the serenity and conviviality of the city, that serenity which made his gluttony possible.  Read in this way, this fact makes The Hog guilty by the sin of omission, by being bitter not from remorse for his glottony, but for his fellow citizens actions, which have deprived him of the opportunity to eat.  If the city is a sack of sin, as the belly is a sack of waste for one who eats beyond the needs of healthy nourishment, than his fellow Florentines who have stuffed themselves full of envy are worse than Ciacco, and are deserving of greater damnation.  Dante knew his Latin and he read Ovid closely.   In many places the Commedia, including in the initiating lines of this Canto, he shows just how close his reading of Ovid has been.  Ovid associates Invidia, the etymology of the which is from invidere, to look against, to give the evil eye,  with seeing maliciously.  This is  instance of the misuse of light, hence the echo of the earlier appearance of Saint Lucy.  But the tongue does more than taste.  The glutton who feeds on envy uses the tongue to speak with evil intent, Ovid's personification of the trait in the Metamorphosis being one who

squinted horribly ... {as}
her tongue dripped venom,
gnawing at others and being gnawed,
She was herself her own torment.

And as we shall see in the prophesy that Ciacco has coaxed Dante to request, this is precisely what Ciacco is doing, and what Dante the poet is doing as well, although he puts his venom in the mouth of his gluttonous protagonist, and thereby tries to avoid the accusation against himself.  And we shall see below, in that prophesy, just how slyly the poet attempts to accomplish this sleight of mouth.  In this prophesy, as elsewhere in hell, we must remember that the speakers' words are forever tainted with deceit.  Whatever Ciacco's words to the aspirant are, we should not forget that the place where he is is an outpicturing of his inner state, and that the monster who would flay and quarter him is a beast with three mouths who only stops barking to eat filth.  Ciacco's parting words here, before his general torpor begins to silence him, is the same kind excuse as Francesca's in the previous Canto: I'm not the only one, others did it too.  This is the first of his evasions, the others follow in his dunciation of his fellow Florentines.  And it amounts to his: maybe I'm guilty, but others did worse.  We can see this now in our current politicl leaders.  Everybody does it.  And my opponants did worse.  You couldn't stand accused in any court docket and use these as a defense against your guilt.          

58  Io li rispuosi: “Ciacco, il tuo affanno
59  mi pesa sì, ch'a lagrimar mi 'nvita;
60  ma dimmi, se tu sai, a che verranno

61  li cittadin de la città partita;
62  s'alcun v'è giusto; e dimmi la cagione
63  per che l'ha tanta discordia assalita.”

64  E quelli a me: “Dopo lunga tencione
65  verranno al sangue, e la parte selvaggia
66  caccerà l'altra con molta offensione.

67  Poi appresso convien che questa caggia
68  infra tre soli, e che l'altra sormonti
69  con la forza di tal che testé piaggia.

70  Alte terrà lungo tempo le fronti,
71  tenendo l'altra sotto gravi pesi,
72  come che di ciò pianga o che n'aonti.

73  Giusti son due, e non vi sono intesi;
74  superbia, invidia e avarizia sono
75  le tre faville c'hanno i cuori accesi.”

76  Qui puose fine al lagrimabil suono.
77  E io a lui: “Ancor vo' che mi 'nsegni
78  e che di più parlar mi facci dono.

79  Farinata e 'l Tegghiaio, che fuor sì degni,
80  Iacopo Rusticucci, Arrigo e 'l Mosca
81  e li altri ch'a ben far puoser li 'ngegni,

82  dimmi ove sono e fa ch'io li conosca;
83  ché gran disio mi stringe di savere
84  se 'l ciel li addolcia o lo 'nferno li attosca.”

85  E quelli: “Ei son tra l'anime più nere;
86  diverse colpe giù li grava al fondo:
87  se tanto scendi, là i potrai vedere.

88  Ma quando tu sarai nel dolce mondo,
89  priegoti ch'a la mente altrui mi rechi:
90  più non ti dico e più non ti rispondo.”

91  Li diritti occhi torse allora in biechi;
92  guardommi un poco e poi chinò la testa:
93  cadde con essa a par de li altri ciechi.

58  I answered him: "Ciacco, thy wretchedness
59  Weighs on me so that it to weep invites me;
60  But tell me, if thou knowest, to what shall come

61  The citizens of the divided city;
62  If any there be just; and the occasion
63  Tell me why so much discord has assailed it."

64  And he to me: "They, after long contention,
65  Will come to bloodshed; and the rustic party
66  Will drive the other out with much offence.

67  Then afterwards behoves it this one fall
68  Within three suns, and rise again the other
69  By force of him who now is on the coast.

70  High will it hold its forehead a long while,
71  Keeping the other under heavy burdens,
72  Howe'er it weeps thereat and is indignant.
73  The just are two, and are not understood there;
74  Envy and Arrogance and Avarice
75  Are the three sparks that have all hearts enkindled."

76  Here ended he his tearful utterance;
77  And I to him: "I wish thee still to teach me,
78  And make a gift to me of further speech.

79  Farinata and Tegghiaio, once so worthy,
80  Jacopo Rusticucci, Arrigo, and Mosca,
81  And others who on good deeds set their thoughts,

82  Say where they are, and cause that I may know them;
83  For great desire constraineth me to learn
84  If Heaven doth sweeten them, or Hell envenom."

85  And he: "They are among the blacker souls;
86  A different sin downweighs them to the bottom;
87  If thou so far descendest, thou canst see them.

88  But when thou art again in the sweet world,
89  I pray thee to the mind of others bring me;
90  No more I tell thee and no more I answer."

91  Then his straightforward eyes he turned askance,
92  Eyed me a little, and then bowed his head;
93  He fell therewith prone like the other blind.

This interaction that the aspirant has with Ciacco suggests certain tacit assumptions about time, space, and knowledge, since Ciacco in these verses is asked for a prophesy.  Francesca only had knowledge of her own circumstances, until she mentions Caina, the 9th circle of hell, as the abode of her husband who murdered her and his own brother ... but, when later her murderer does not appear there, do we in retrospect assume that what Francesca has said was only self-serving wish-fulfillment on her part?  Here, however, straight out prophesy is asked for and supplied.  For most readers whoever the five Florentine's mentioned were in the late 13th and early 14th centuries, and whatever their politics might have been, are moot points.  What is important, then, is what the inclusion of historicity implies as another layer of meaning in the poem.  The historical, just as it did with the incarnation, makes time into a line with befores and afters, arranged in sequence in a communal history, and it is clear throughout the text that what happens in this historical time, however temporary, has eternal implications — or as Blake says, "Eternity is in love with the productions of time."  What is eternity then, and how does eternal time differ from historical time?  Eternity, whether below the plane of historical time, as it is here, of above it, as it is for those in Purgatory or Paradise, is a place wherefrom the denizens of those realms have a meta-perspective on history and historical actors.  The shades in eternity are able to see and know what those trapped in sequential time cannot.  In hell, the  the shades can see the roots of historical actions as their own conditions of torment.  They deal in time as torment, their actions as living people productive of torment, their speeches full of news of torment.  But this is news of a twisted sort born from the historical actions of twisted people.  And this is what the aspirant is asking for here, news from this meta-position of torment.  If we replaced the names of these 5 Florentines with 5 of our own contemporaries, then these passages would have the effect that they would have had on Dante's contemporaries when they first read the poem.  But, if we did that, we would destroy their historicity, and by implication the incarnation, for all physical bodies exist in historical time, just as all imaginative bodies exist in the non-local non-temporal worlds of their own making.  All this section of Ciacco's prophesy, as well as the discussion between the aspirant and Virgil which conclude this Canto, are but tortured ways to present the relationship between history and imagination — history that binds all temporal life with mortality's deterministic sequential chains of causes and effects — sins and punishments, virtues and rewards — and imagination, which moves among the shades of hell, the souls of those in purgatory, and the spirits of those in paradise, and determines what is sin and what is virtue, and what should be the eternal punishments and rewards for those thoughts, feelings and actions fomented by the blinkered temporal body.

Dante, the aspirant, is conducting a seance, contacting the dead for news that only the dead can have, because only the dead have this meta-perspective on the historical actors.  They see their twisted actions, even if the historical public only sees their social masks.  Dante, the historical character, pretends anxiety for the five men mentioned here — Farinata, Tegghiaio, Iacopo Rusticucci, Arrigo, and Mosca.  He speaks of them as those who upon good things placed their thoughts (ch'a ben far puoser li 'ngegni), and that pretense is ironic, because Dante the poet, from his imaginative meta-position, already knows the fate of these, his own contemporaries.  He knows it, because he has invented it in his imagination.  Note too that Ciacco's prophesies are couched in that strange ambiguity which all such utterances have: an allegorical vagueness — in three suns (soli) — not three days (not giorni).  Then there is the Wheel of Fortune aspect.  As one set of political actors weighs itself down by its own moral enormities, the other pops up, but only to be weighed down in their turn by the same motivations and actions which corrupted their enemies, and finally, to be animated from torpor by blood (sangue, line 63), as they are in the Odyssey and in the Aeneid.  The hearts of those on both sides of this political battle are consumed by the flames of pride (superbia), invidia (envy), and avarizia (avarice).  These are in fact the actual crimes that the city has bred in its inhabitants, and the banner of secular rule verses papal rule, or visa versa, is only another zero sum game that generates such conflagrations.  Civil war, raging in the political sphere, is caused by and causes the civil war raging inside historical actors, who are futilely using the soul weapons of pride, envy, and greed to accomplish a civic and personal good.  The results of this civil war are just what one would expect them to be — disastrous for the community, and disastrous for the citizens of the community.  And what did we discover were the connecting points of identity between Dante, the historical actor, the five people named here, and Ciacco?  They were all fellow citizens, the linkage between their identities forever and unbreakably forged by the geographical accident of their births in the same place.  This is the same thing that linked Dante and Virgil across time, the same thing that linked Dante and Beatrice in propinquitous space.  

But why discuss these political questions — these questions of inner corruption and civil war — in a canto ostensibly concerned with gluttony.  Because gluttony is a sin of the belly (the sack mentioned eariler, the throat and the tongue, and Ciacco, in his condemnation of these five fellow Florentines, is wielding one of the chief weapons of any civil conflict, or any inner conflict — that is to say, slander.  And just as gluttons can never stuff themselves with enough food, they can never purge their disgust and anger at those who have thwarted them, by vomiting enough slander.  Whatever else this heavy precipitation is, whatever Cerberus' thunderings, clawings, and quarterings are, they are slanderous, and slander is waste, crap, urine, vomit, and its heavy, grief-inducing pummeling is a perpetual feature of any conflict, internal or external.

Now the question to be dealt with in any civil conflict is one of justice.  Who is just, and who gets to arbitrate justice?  In this case, it is the accuser, the self-confessed glutton, the one who tries to identify himself, have himself recognized, even as he sinks back into the agglomeration of waste and wasted (line 89: I pray thee to the mind of others bring me — priegoti ch'a la mente altrui me rechi).  This accused and accuser is Ciacco, the Hog.  It is a Hog that elicits the aspirant's tears and pity.  So, just as with Francesca, it is Dante's pity that keeps him from seeing the propriety of Divine Justice, Dante's pity that makes him go to the pitiful for prophesy, even as Virgil, a truer guide, has to this point been unacknowledged and silent.

This Canto uses the framing device of arising from the unconscious, and falling back again into unconsciousness.  The aspirant had arisen from a coma wherein his mind (mente) was closed by pity for the incestuous adulterers.  Now when Ciacco hears a living soul passing, he arises from the general coma, falls back again after the question of his identity is examined but not resolved, is called forth again in a seance for the gift of prophesy, and after speaking ill of the dead, and ambiguously about justice, he is submersed again.  His final words?  that Dante, a living soul, should pray, and recall him to the minds (mente again) of others.   Here again in Ciacco's arising upon after seeing Virgil and Dante, he falls after speaking to them.  He looks forward, turns askance (biechi) and falls (cadde).  And now we are back with this word cadde with the aspirant at the end of Canto V, and we remember how the aspirant fell after hearing Francesca's deceitful tale.  Ciacco falls among the other blind, which is to say, Ciacco rose, saw, spoke, was heard, forgot or repressed it all, then fell again, doing a face-plant in his own and the collective's waste.   So, along with this twisting, tortured, torqued motif, we have this arising and falling of consciousness, a scale wherein one side of conscious/unconscious balance can only be in ascendance as the other side is repressed.  Historical actors are damned or praised in eternity, and those eternal actors of the soul, i.e., in the imagination, damn or praise historical actors.

In this third circle of hell, we are, in lines 65 and 69, brought back to the first canto by the word selvaggia (wild, bewildering, savage) and the references to the force (forza) of one on the coast (piaggia).  From the first instance, we remember the savage wood, and from the second instance, we are reminded of the metaphor of the swimmer who has almost drowned, after reaching the beach, then looks back upon the element which had almost submersed him.  It should also be noted that the condition of consciousness is not that of truth, or sensory acuity, or prophesy, it is the ability to speak and be heard, to call and respond, to confess and receive confessions, and to conduct a seance in order to coax knowledge from the dead, and thus provide a channel for the dead or absent to speak and to be heard.  The first canto is also echoed in the final exit of Ciacco, with the word diritte (line 91, Canto VI, and line 3, Canto I).  Ciacco ceases to look straight, and loses his sight and insight, this trope being repeated from Canto I, where the aspirant has lost the straight path, and cannot continue his spiritual climb, but must go down instead and harrow hell.  

94  E 'l duca disse a me: “Più non si desta
95  di qua dal suon de l'angelica tromba,
96  quando verrà la nimica podesta:

97  ciascun rivederà la trista tomba,
98  ripiglierà sua carne e sua figura,
99  udirà quel ch'in etterno rimbomba.”

100  Sì trapassammo per sozza mistura
101  de l'ombre e de la pioggia, a passi lenti,
102  toccando un poco la vita futura;

103  per ch'io dissi: “Maestro, esti tormenti
104  crescerann' ei dopo la gran sentenza,
105  o fier minori, o saran sì cocenti?”

106  Ed elli a me: “Ritorna a tua scïenza,
107  che vuol, quanto la cosa è più perfetta,
108  più senta il bene, e così la doglienza.

109  Tutto che questa gente maladetta
110  in vera perfezion già mai non vada,
111  di là più che di qua essere aspetta.”

112  Noi aggirammo a tondo quella strada,
113  parlando più assai ch'i' non ridico;
114  venimmo al punto dove si digrada:

115  quivi trovammo Pluto, il gran nemico.
 
94  And the Guide said to me: "He wakes no more
95  This side the sound of the angelic trumpet;
96  When shall approach the hostile Potentate,
97  Each one shall find again his dismal tomb,
98  Shall reassume his flesh and his own figure,
99  Shall hear what through eternity re-echoes."

100  So we passed onward o'er the filthy mixture
101  Of shadows and of rain with footsteps slow,
102  Touching a little on the future life.

103  Wherefore I said: "Master, these torments here,
104  Will they increase after the mighty sentence,
105  Or lesser be, or will they be as burning?"

106  And he to me: "Return unto thy science,
107  Which wills, that as the thing more perfect is,
108  The more it feels of pleasure and of pain.

109  Albeit that this people maledict
110  To true perfection never can attain,
111  Hereafter more than now they look to be."

112  Round in a circle by that road we went,
113  Speaking much more, which I do not repeat;
114  We came unto the point where the descent is;

115  There we found Plutus the great enemy.

Historical time is a sequence, and as such, it must have a beginning and it must have an end.  and the entelechy, time's end, as Terrance McKenna would call it, must be defined.  The historical incarnation is the center of a circle, and the historical sequence which that center point transacts begins with the creation and ends with the last trumpet.  When the last pages of this book, which can only be read sequentially, are closed, and we have perfected ourselves in its exegesis, than all that has been is seen as it is, the product of a divine justice.  The damned too will hear that trump, but it will not, as Virgil tells the aspirant, release them from the punishment of that justice, but will only almost, but not quite, perfect them in perfect/imperfect suffering.  We have to understand, that if this universe, as Dante is defining it, were to end with the end of suffering, almost all its history would be erased, and along with that erasure, the profound meaning of the incarnation.  That could never be, for that would destroy the center of the universe, and make things without form and void once again — which would hardly be perfection.  

The Canto ends with Virgil and Dante proceeding, as we are told elsewhere, counter-clockwise to the left on the circular, circulating road, and speaking of things, which are not repeated — a statement which hints at the talk between the poets in limbo, when they spoke of secret things that were better left unspoken.  And then, just as this Canto begins with a reference to the due cognati, the two murdered, adulterous in-laws of the previous Canto, it ends with a reference to Pluto, whose curses begin the next Canto.  Note: Cerbero: gran vermo / Pluto: gran nemico, like adjective, like rhymes, linking transitional monsters — examples of Dante's poetic skill abound.     Churchill once said: "If you're going through hell, keep going."  And our pilgrims, while speaking of final, unrepeated things (for nothing in historical time could ever be repeated, that is one of its purposes, it makes things unique, it makes decisions final) — our pilgrims, to repeat, must now continue on that road, twisting, and turning through the tortured and the torturous, down and down and down.  And what unique pilgrims are these, almost perfecting, in their respective poems, the history of human pain.  And where does this leave the readers, our readers, ourselves?   It leaves us reading and re-reading, interpreting and re-interpreting these same words, again and again, immersing ourselves, diving and rising, as imperfectly as we can, as we slowly perfect our imperfect understandings.

Canto VII
Canto VII unfolds as follows:

Introduction, the deflation of Pluto or The Power of Speech Defeating Nonsense, 

First group of sinners: hoarders and wastrals.

Virgil's first exposition, including the denunciation of corrupt clergy

Virgil's second expostion on the question of recognition, identity and Fame/Infamy

Virgil's third exposition on Lady Fortuna

Second group of sinners, the Wrathful and Sullen

Conclusion: Return to Inarticulateness as the submerged Sullen belch words they cannot pronounce   

1  Pape Satàn, pape Satàn aleppe!”
2  cominciò Pluto con la voce chioccia;
3  e quel savio gentil, che tutto seppe,

4  disse per confortarmi: “Non ti noccia
5  la tua paura; ché, poder ch'elli abbia,
6  non ci torrà lo scender questa roccia.”

7  Poi si rivolse a quella 'nfiata labbia,
8  e disse: “Taci, maladetto lupo!
9  consuma dentro te con la tua rabbia.

10  Non è sanza cagion l'andare al cupo:
11  vuolsi ne l'alto, là dove Michele
12  fé la vendetta del superbo strupo.”

13  Quali dal vento le gonfiate vele
14  caggiono avvolte, poi che l'alber fiacca,
15  tal cadde a terra la fiera crudele.

16  Così scendemmo ne la quarta lacca,
17  pigliando più de la dolente ripa
18  che 'l mal de l'universo tutto insacca.

1  "Pape Satan, Pape Satan, Aleppe!"
2  Thus Plutus with his clucking voice began;
3  And that benignant Sage, who all things knew,

4  Said, to encourage me: "Let not thy fear
5  Harm thee; for any power that he may have
6  Shall not prevent thy going down this crag."

7  Then he turned round unto that bloated lip,
8  And said: "Be silent, thou accursed wolf;
9  Consume within thyself with thine own rage.

10  Not causeless is this journey to the abyss;
11  Thus is it willed on high, where Michael wrought
12  Vengeance upon the proud adultery."

13  Even as the sails inflated by the wind
14  Involved together fall when snaps the mast,
15  So fell the cruel monster to the earth.

16  Thus we descended into the fourth chasm,
17  Gaining still farther on the dolesome shore
18  Which all the woe of the universe insacks.

Think of narrative as an analog of historical time, sequential and always moving forward.  Think of metaphor as that which cuts across that sequence, gives it depth, as harmony gives depth to music.  Dante drives his narrative forward, as in this case, by building a bridge between cantos. Pluto being mentioned as the great enemy at the end of the previous canto (as Cerberus was the great worm), is here linked to the Tourette Syndrome-like outburst, which begins this canto.  By means of these bridging devices, along with the purposeful annunciation of which "circle" of hell we are now in, Dante keeps driving the narrative forward, and does so with such precision that there is no chance of us shuffling the cantos, and producing them out of order, no disputes, as there are in Chaucer, for example, of what follows what in the narrative sequence.  It is midnight on Good Friday, April 8th, 1300, and yet, metaphorically we are continually being plunged into the depths of each moment, mythic time, dropping us into eddies and swirls that pull us into an undertow of analogies which cause us to recall earlier sequences in the poem, and give us fore-echoes of later ones.  The historical line is transected by stops, by gaps in the aspirant's conscious awareness, and by the asides and commentaries of the narrator Dante, who occasionally raises the curtain and shows us the wizard subtly and skillfully managing those effects and affects which he wants the reader or listener to experience.  

Canto VII begins with Pluto's verbal word-salad, a parody of "speaking in tongues", such as we might find in schizophrenics or magicians, and it ends with the Sullen, lying below swamp water, belching words that become noxious bubbles, their sense made nonsense, like that of stroke victims, whose speech intentions come out as gobblygook.  The last line of the canto leaves us at the foot of a tower, which metaphorically shadows all that has gone before with the curse of Babble.   Hell is not only deceitful, it also defies logic, i.e., the linguistic sequential sense, and the framing of Canto VII shows how language itself can be disordered, and with it historical time.  These poetic, metaphoric devices cut across the narrative line, cast forth irreconcilable ambiguities from the depths, and even though we have this continuous line of narrative to follow, the line is a downward spiral, into deeper levels of chaos, wherein the damned experience, not eternity, but interminable repetitions, like autistics who repeat the same actions, or Alzheimer victims, who repeat the same stories.  

There is something in this Canto which defines the power of speech, and of the music of speech, as we start in the first line with what might be called malevolent nonsense, Pluto's words almost but not quite being comprehensible, and end the canto with belched bubbles.  For 800 years commentators have not been able to definitively define Pluto's outburst — but its affect is clear enough.  These blatherings are curses, some kind of verbal formula meant to stop and deter the poets, and they have power (poder), but only power over the damned.  And like the other conglomerate beings that have previously tried to stop the poet's progress, Pluto too is a mess of irreconcilable parts.  He clucks like a chicken, has a bloated lip like some kind of sea monster, and has a ravenous and avaricious disposition like a wolf.  And yet, he is in a sense full of hot air, and when Virgil speaks to him — calling him out — describing him — denoucing him — confronting him with reason (cagion) and heaven's (or Dante, the poet's) will (voulsi ne l'alto), Pluto's inflated sense of power immediately collapses, as the sails of a ship in a gale immediately collapse when the mast is snapped (lines 13-15).  The power of Virgil's speech, of reason and will, is that gale which tears to tatters the nonsense of Pluto's magical curses, and makes their illusory power irrelevant — full of sound and fury and signifying nothing.  We should also add that Pluto, being the mythical diety associated with wealth, is a fit monster to oversee the sinners in this circle, whose only approach to wealth is to hoard or waste it.

There is a progression here, from air, to water, to rocks, and one way to view this progression is to interpret it as speech (air), the affects of speech (water), and the actions prompted by speech (rock).  And we will see, as the sequential narrative unfolds in this canto, how these metaphors continuously draw us down, not only into hell, but also into the deeper moral insights which will eventually deliver us from hell, and from the tyranny of sequential speech and historical time.

Language notes:

Line 11: Here Virgil refers to the war in Heaven in which the archangel Michael, sometimes depicted with a sword for a tongue, casts Lucifer and the rebellious angels out of heaven.  This sin is equated with the breaking of marriage vows through adultery (strupo), a very troubadorian act, and one which the historical Dante, at least in his heart, was thoroughly guilty of.  This one word gives as a brief window into the psyche of Dante, wherein poetry itself, especially the poetry of the Vita Nuova, is a kind fidelity based upon infidelity, a sin of the body, and a virtue of the spirit. 

Line 18: The word insacca (to insack), reminds us of how Ciacco compares the corruption of Florence to a busting sack. The word also has a bubble-like connotation, which foreshadows the swamp bubbles we find arising from the Sullen at the end of this canto.

The spiral, twisting motion, that motif which we have seen throughout the work so far, is here confined to the pirouette which Virgil makes as he turns (revolsi) from comforting the aspirant to cursing Pluto.      

The word cadde (falls) in line 18, reminds us of the alliterative line which ended Canto V: E caddi come corpo morto cade.      

19  Ahi giustizia di Dio! tante chi stipa
20  nove travaglie e pene quant' io viddi?
21  e perché nostra colpa sì ne scipa?

19  Justice of God, ah! who heaps up so many
20  New toils and sufferings as I beheld?
21  And why doth our transgression waste us so?

Lines 19-21: Another peak behind the curtain hidding the poet Dante, who is here commenting on the action — but also using this metaposition to speak on behalf of the reader, who may himself be wondering about the severity of God's justice.

22  Come fa l'onda là sovra Cariddi,
23  che si frange con quella in cui s'intoppa,
24  così convien che qui la gente riddi.

25  Qui vid' i' gente più ch'altrove troppa,
26  e d'una parte e d'altra, con grand' urli,
27  voltando pesi per forza di poppa.

28  Percotëansi 'ncontro; e poscia pur lì
29  si rivolgea ciascun, voltando a retro,
30  gridando: “Perché tieni?” e “Perché burli?”

31  Così tornavan per lo cerchio tetro
32  da ogne mano a l'opposito punto,
33  gridandosi anche loro ontoso metro;

34  poi si volgea ciascun, quand' era giunto,
35  per lo suo mezzo cerchio a l'altra giostra.
36  E io, ch'avea lo cor quasi compunto,

22  As doth the billow there upon Charybdis,
23  That breaks itself on that which it encounters,
24  So here the folk must dance their roundelay.
 
25  Here saw I people, more than elsewhere, many,
26  On one side and the other, with great howls,
27  Rolling weights forward by main force of chest.

28  They clashed together, and then at that point
29  Each one turned backward, rolling retrograde,
30  Crying, "Why keepest?" and, "Why squanderest thou?"

31  Thus they returned along the lurid circle
32  On either hand unto the opposite point,
33  Shouting their shameful metre evermore.

34  Then each, when he arrived there, wheeled about
35  Through his half-circle to another joust;
36  And I, who had my heart pierced as it were,

The remarkable skill in which Dante extends and develops metaphor is on grand display throughout this canto: as the wind or air metaphor of the collapsed sails evolves into waves crashing together, as they do at Charybdis, sidesteps into a circle metaphor of people dancing a senseless roundelay — which afterwards becomes a violent joust — then moves forward to the crashing rocks metaphor, as the hoarders and wastrels clash in a repetitive conflict in which their seeming opposites meet, just as when we travel in opposite directions from any point at the circumference of a circle, we will arrive at a point on the other side of the circle, where the opposites crash together again.  They then roll back to their starting point, only to repeat the cycle.  Everything in these few lines is compact and economical, and yet incredibly rich, as Dante's style demonstrates what the hoarders and wastrels did not.  We pick up the speech metaphor as well as the clashing hoarders and wastrels shout the same insults at one another, and with great efforts, pushing with their chests (poppa/modern Italian petto, or chest) the stones in which they hope to crush their eternal enemies.  Chest equals lungs, and it is the lungs, not the articulating tongues, which shout only the same two-word insults over and over in ceaseless refrains: Why grasp?!  Why squander?! (line 30).  These refrains are very pointedly compared both to music and to poetry in line 33 with the word meter: shouting their shameful metre evermore (gridandosi anche loro ontoso metro).  The rocks remind us of Sisyphus, who is punished by rolling a rock up a steep incline, only to have it roll back over him before reaching the crest, and then having to start the same process again.  

Once again, in line 36, we have the aspirant overcome with pity, but, unlike the situation in the circle of the lustful or in the circle of the gluttons, in which Virgil is silent, now the aspirant again turns to reason for comfort (line 4 of the canto), and for the an explanation.  And so begins Virgil's first lecture on who these sinners are, why their punishment is as it is, and finally, showing the aspirant that those devoted to a religious calling were not exempt from these sins.    

37  dissi: “Maestro mio, or mi dimostra
38  che gente è questa, e se tutti fuor cherci
39  questi chercuti a la sinistra nostra.”

40  Ed elli a me: “Tutti quanti fuor guerci
41  sì de la mente in la vita primaia,
42  che con misura nullo spendio ferci.

43  Assai la voce lor chiaro l'abbaia,
44  quando vegnono a' due punti del cerchio
45  dove colpa contraria li dispaia.
46  Questi fuor cherci, che non han coperchio
47  piloso al capo, e papi e cardinali,
48  in cui usa avarizia il suo soperchio.”
37  Exclaimed: "My Master, now declare to me
38  What people these are, and if all were clerks,
39  These shaven crowns upon the left of us."

40  And he to me: "All of them were asquint
41  In intellect in the first life, so much
42  That there with measure they no spending made.

43  Clearly enough their voices bark it forth,
44  Whene'er they reach the two points of the circle,
45  Where sunders them the opposite defect.

46  Clerks those were who no hairy covering
47  Have on the head, and Popes and Cardinals,
48  In whom doth Avarice practise its excess."

If we remember the hear/see motif that has been a feature throughout these early cantos of the inferno, then the sequence starting in line 40 of damaged sight (querci — literally one-eyed in modern Italian, and translated here as asquint) followed by inarticulate noise instead of speech (line 43 — assai la voice lor chiaro l'abaia — clearly enough their voices bark it forth), parodies what is the correct sequence, vis à vis, reading.  First we sound the words, then we see the meaning.  For these sinners that is not possible.  Their speech is damaged, just as their master Pluto's speech is damaged.  In fact, they bark like dogs or wolves.  Also their sight, or insight is marred.  Virgil, our interpreter here, says that even though the sinner's speech has descended into an animal-like patois, the reader: Dante, the aspirant, or whoever is reading these words in the moment, finds their meaning clear (chiaro) — a word that pertains both to hearing and seeing: clear sounds, clear sight, clear understanding (mente). 

The text also makes clear where the sinners who most interest the aspirant are: on the left (a la sinestra), left being the direction the poets are travelling, the Italian word sinestra saying enough about how leftness was viewed in the popular parlance.  In the Kabbalah, which Dante studied, the left path is a sort of via negativa of the spirit, so that being to the left of where the poets stand — presumably at the Aristotelian medium between the hoarders and wastrels — singles these sinners out as being particularly odious, both because they are clergy, and also because the text holds avarice (line 48: avarizia) to be an even worse sin the prodigality — perhaps because there is no joy in it, or perhaps because the gospel tale of the prodigal son gives the prodigal some little leeway that the greedy cannot claim.  At least the prodigal's wealth goes into circulation, whereas the hoarder deprives both himself and others.  (See Mark Jay Mirsky: Dante, Eros, Kabbalah for a fuller discussion of Dante's relationship to the Kabbalah.)  

There is also in lines 38 and 39 some punning around the words cherci (clerics) and chercuti (tonsured).  This tonsuring  should denote a religious calling, and over time, it has come to symbolize many things, among them being 

* the halo, 
* the fact that like slaves, whose heads were shaved, the renunciates were God's slaves
* celibacy: as hair was considered an erotic signification
* an homage to Saint Peter, who had his head shaved as a prisoner

Finally, there is this word misura, made famous among the troubadours as an attribute of the perfect lover, Eros here being attached to money — remember Christ's edict: the love of money is the root of all evil.  The troubadour, Marcebru, says that true love (fin'amor) has three attributes: Jois, Sofrirs e Misura — joy, patience, moderation.  (See the essay Fin'Amor, Moshe Lazar, page 68, A Handbook of the Troubadours, Akehurst, Davis, ed.), and these clerics — among whom are cardinals and popes, clearly have forgone all measure, all moderation, and all temperance when it came to wealth, either hoarding or squandering it.  And by analogy, the clerics have also perverted their calling as God's lovers.  In brief, if they were to be espoused to Christ, they are, like Francesca, in the previous canto, adulterers, and like Ciacco, they have stuffed themselves with wealth beyond any compacity for its nourishing use.  In all this, Dante, the poet, veers very close to heresy himself, especially by denouncing Popes, who are assumed to be the Vicars of Christ, and as such infallible.  And whether putting these words in the mouth of Virgil is an end-run to absolve himself of that heresy, or by having a pagan condemn Christians is an extra dig at the corrupt clergy, it skills not to ask, although there is every possibility that he intended both readings.       

49  E io: “Maestro, tra questi cotali
50  dovre' io ben riconoscere alcuni
51  che furo immondi di cotesti mali.”

52  Ed elli a me: “Vano pensiero aduni:
53  la sconoscente vita che i fé sozzi,
54  ad ogne conoscenza or li fa bruni.

55  In etterno verranno a li due cozzi:
56  questi resurgeranno del sepulcro
57  col pugno chiuso, e questi coi crin mozzi.

58  Mal dare e mal tener lo mondo pulcro
59  ha tolto loro, e posti a questa zuffa:
60  qual ella sia, parole non ci appulcro.

49  And I: "My Master, among such as these
50  I ought forsooth to recognise some few,
51  Who were infected with these maladies."

52  And he to me: "Vain thought thou entertainest;
53  The undiscerning life which made them sordid
54  Now makes them unto all discernment dim.

55  Forever shall they come to these two buttings;
56  These from the sepulchre shall rise again
57  With the fist closed, and these with tresses shorn.

58  Ill giving and ill keeping the fair world
59  Have ta'en from them, and placed them in this scuffle;
60  Whate'er it be, no words adorn I for it.

In this second lecture by Virgil, once again the text takes up the question of identity, which throughout the Commedia is an issue entangled with complex equivalencies around certain concepts.  These concepts would be recognition or anonymity, fame or infamy, praise or damnation.  It seems as if the poet, Dante, in these lines, adheres to a practice of not granting recognition to people who were not already famous or infamous, as was the case with Ciacco.  There is no attribution, in such cases, which would further spread the notariaty of the malefactors.   But in the case for Francesca, Cleopatra, Helen, Paolo, Tristram, et al, whose stories were well-known, he uses his metaposition as the poet, to denounce their transgressions.  

Virgil's words in line 60 are revealing: qual ella sia, parole non ci appulcro (Whate're it be, no words adorn I for it).  Further discussions of these people are not worthy to be enshrined in the temple of poetry.  This line too is another instance wherein the rhyme adds an extra depth of meaning.  Pulcro, possibly a coinage by Dante from the Latin pulcer, meaning beautiful or fair, and used here in the paraphrastic phrase lo mondo pulcro, to refer to heaven, is linked to the word appulcro (to adorn, to beautify), used by Virgil as an attribute of poetry.  This rhyme gives us a keen insight concerning just how much prestige Dante attributed to the art of poetry.  

61  Or puoi, figliuol, veder la corta buffa
62  d'i ben che son commessi a la fortuna,
63  per che l'umana gente si rabuffa;

64  ché tutto l'oro ch'è sotto la luna
65  e che già fu, di quest' anime stanche
66  non poterebbe farne posare una.”

67  “Maestro mio,” diss' io, “or mi dì anche:
68  questa fortuna di che tu mi tocche,
69  che è, che i ben del mondo ha sì tra branche?”

70  E quelli a me: “Oh creature sciocche,
71  quanta ignoranza è quella che v'offende!
72  Or vo' che tu mia sentenza ne 'mbocche.

73  Colui lo cui saver tutto trascende,
74  fece li cieli e diè lor chi conduce
75  sì, ch'ogne parte ad ogne parte splende,

76  distribuendo igualmente la luce.
77  Similemente a li splendor mondani
78  ordinò general ministra e duce

79  che permutasse a tempo li ben vani
80  di gente in gente e d'uno in altro sangue,
81  oltre la difension d'i senni umani;

82  per ch'una gente impera e l'altra langue,
83  seguendo lo giudicio di costei,
84  che è occulto come in erba l'angue.

85  Vostro saver non ha contasto a lei:
86  questa provede, giudica, e persegue
87  suo regno come il loro li altri dèi.

88  Le sue permutazion non hanno triegue:
89  necessità la fa esser veloce;
90  sì spesso vien chi vicenda consegue.

91  Quest' è colei ch'è tanto posta in croce
92  pur da color che le dovrien dar lode,
93  dandole biasmo a torto e mala voce;

94  ma ella s'è beata e ciò non ode:
95  con l'altre prime creature lieta
96  volve sua spera e beata si gode.

61  Now canst thou, Son, behold the transient farce
62  Of goods that are committed unto Fortune,
63  For which the human race each other buffet;

64  For all the gold that is beneath the moon,
65  Or ever has been, of these weary souls
66  Could never make a single one repose."

67  "Master," I said to him, "now tell me also
68  What is this Fortune which thou speakest of,
69  That has the world's goods so within its clutches?"

70  And he to me: "O creatures imbecile,
71  What ignorance is this which doth beset you?
72  Now will I have thee learn my judgment of her.

73  He whose omniscience everything transcends
74  The heavens created, and gave who should guide them,
75  That every part to every part may shine,

76  Distributing the light in equal measure;
77  He in like manner to the mundane splendours
78  Ordained a general ministress and guide,

79  That she might change at times the empty treasures
80  From race to race, from one blood to another,
81  Beyond resistance of all human wisdom.

82  Therefore one people triumphs, and another
83  Languishes, in pursuance of her judgment,
84  Which hidden is, as in the grass a serpent.

85  our knowledge has no counterstand against her;
86  She makes provision, judges, and pursues
87  Her governance, as theirs the other gods.

88  Her permutations have not any truce;
89  Necessity makes her precipitate,
90  So often cometh who his turn obtains.

91  And this is she who is so crucified
92  Even by those who ought to give her praise,
93  Giving her blame amiss, and bad repute.

94  But she is blissful, and she hears it not;
95  Among the other primal creatures gladsome
96  She turns her sphere, and blissful she rejoices.

This is Virgil's third lesson of the canto, a teaching on the Goddess Fortuna, who turns her sphere, and blissful she rejoices — line 96 — (volve sua spera e beata si gode).  The moral question is: How can the operations of chance be morally possible in a cosmos created and run by an omnipotent, omni-benevolent, omni-present, and omniscient God?   Consider the following commentary by Casini/Barbi concerning the High Middle Age's conception of fortune:

A given human being may typically move, along eight points on Fortune's wheel, from humility, to patience, to peace, to riches, to pride, to impatience, to war, to poverty. This is a typical 'ride' of anyone tied to Fortune's wheel, ending back at the starting point. 
 
Fortune in the Commedia, and in Virgil's speech, is not what we would call random, or the product of coincidence or chance.  It is ordained, and Fortuna has been authorized to judge and provide (provede, line 83), that is to say, fortune is a product of foreseeing by Divine Providence (which is what the word Providence means: foreseeing).  In this she is God-like, (line 87), and has, unlike messenger angels, for example, executive powers.  In brief, She can decide who gets what and when.  She is God's left hand, his female counterpart, the Binah Sephirot (sephirot = wheel), to return to our Kabbalistic metaphor, which might be another way of saying that she is the hidden, esoteric or occult aspect of Providence, like a serpent in the grass (line 84).  The fact that the text makes this simile, links her to what we would ordinarily call Devilish — incomprehensible evil and mischance, as incomprehensible good is called a blessing or grace.  In contrast to Chokmah on the Tree of Life, who represents wisdom, She is synonymous with understanding.  But this understanding should not be construed as any possibility of foreknowledge of her actions.  There is much that can be understood in hindsight, that are not at the same time predictive: Evolution, for example.  This is the kind of understanding we seem to be hearing about here.  It is an understanding of the emotional stance that humans should take when they are being spun about in Fortuna's vicissitudes.  What strikes me about Virgil's speech is it's Buddhistic aspect.  Fortuna is blissful, specifically blessed with joy in executing her duties (line 96), and by implication, we should not condemn her, or crucify her (lines 91 - 93) with blame, but rather praise her for teaching us that everything in this sublunar, mutable world is temporary and vanishing.  As our model of understanding, She is an exemplar of the joy of primal creatures, each of which is its own depository of God's equally distributed light.  If we would share in Her bliss, we would be as She is, light receiving light, and we would rejoice at any chance that comes to us, because every chance that comes to us teaches us the path of beatitude.  In line 94, Virgil says she is blissful, and hears not (ma ella s'è beata e ciò non ode), and we remember Canto II of the Inferno, where Beatrice was also impervious to suffering in her own person.  Fortuna seems also to be that.  But taking her bliss one step further, unlike Beatrice, who can hear of and respond to the sufferings of others, Fortuna cannot hear, or will not hear, of such sufferings.  And as we know from the hear/see motif displayed through these early cantos, not to hear, is not to see: hence Fortuna, like Justice, is often depicted as blindfolded.  

There are many exquisite details in Virgil's explication.  Lines 88 - 89: Her permutations have not any truce;/ Necessity makes her precipitate (Le sue permutazion non hanno triegue: / necessità la fa esser veloce ... literally: Necessity has caused her to be speedy).  In other words, the bullet that hits you you never hear or see coming, change being always swifter than our ability to track its permutations.  We also have here the Life is War metaphor.  Fortuna never makes a truce.  And perhaps this is a good place to say that we could arrange the entire Commedia into three basic metaphors for life:

Life is war — Inferno
Life is school — Purgatorio
Life is play — Paradiso

Finally, there are a couple of tropes regarding Virgil's teaching style, which gives us some insight into what Dante, the poet, considers, pertinent to instructing a tyro.  The first is a strong denunciation of any ignorance on the chela's part (lines 70 - 72).  The student offends himself by continuing in ignorance, a clear denunciation of the old adage: Ignorance is bliss.  And in this stanza too is a wonderful example of figurative speech in the word imbocchare (l'imbocche — to put it in your mouth), which is literally the teacher, like a mother bird, putting the teaching in the mouth of her chick, the student — so — words as worms.  One could also interpret this as a breath to breath transference, a resuscitation that is an inspiration.

One of the easier things — but still not easy — to do when commenting on Dante is to hone in on the details, and to finally begin to realize just how interwoven those details are with one another.  But we should not be ignorant of the fact that a certain tone, an impression, an overall morphology is constantly insinuating itself into the reader's consciousness.  As readers we get a Copernican worldview in which everything is enwombed or ensphered, and the old adage of the High Middle Ages that God is a circle whose center is everywhere and whose circumference is nowhere begins to assert its inexorable allure.  In short, to use an alchemical term, alive or dead, we remain in the round glass retort of God's vigilance and love.  It is a bit like being inside one of those glass souvenirs that you swirl so as to make a blizzard of artificial snow, our souls after death, and our bodies in life, always moving through unseen currents of circles, spirals, corkscrews, vortices, wheels, eddies, with, in this case, the Goddess Fortuna as the one who swirls the sphere.  The point is is that there is always a feeling in Dante of being inside something, moving through a vessel, the sky itself not being an openness, or even a beyond, but the dome of an imperium which is itself inside another sphere, and so on, until we reach the circle of the fixed stars.  What this might mean is that in the retort, there is no actual randomness, but only relative degrees of control or movement along currents and paths which are all inside that sphere — our souls a flow of God's breath, which circulates constantly according to that will, either as angels singing praises around a divine throne, or as malefactors exiled in the cyclonic gestures of hell.  Compare the Commedia to The Canterbury Tales.  In Chaucer there is always this openness — anything can happen, and there is no moral center.  Moreover, the tone is ironic, and even tales like The Knight's Tale, not ironic in itself, is undercut by the irony of The Miller's Tale which often follows it.  In Dante, the sense is that we never leave that moral center, and even the end of the poem is a dive deeper into the folds of the Rosa Mistica, the soul itself subsumed in the center's center.  I would even go so far as to say, that even in the worst parts of the Inferno, where the punishments and atmospheres are horrendous, disgusting, torturous, and so forth, there remains a feeling of being at home in the Center which is Everywhere.  It is perhaps Dante's great gift to we post-moderns, who live in a scattering random spray of unpredictable events and circumstances, that reading him infuses us once again with the feeling of Divine Order, the feeling that we are never outside the circle of God's care, or as Blake says: "God is everywhere, even in the depths of Hell," and where even Fortune is a wheel whose turning continually pulls us towards this center which is home.    
 
97  Or discendiamo omai a maggior pieta;
98  già ogne stella cade che saliva
99  quand' io mi mossi, e 'l troppo star si vieta.”

100  Noi ricidemmo il cerchio a l'altra riva
101  sovr' una fonte che bolle e riversa
102  per un fossato che da lei deriva.

103  L'acqua era buia assai più che persa;
104  e noi, in compagnia de l'onde bige,
105  intrammo giù per una via diversa.

106  In la palude va c'ha nome Stige
107  questo tristo ruscel, quand' è disceso
108  al piè de le maligne piagge grige.

109  E io, che di mirare stava inteso,
110  vidi genti fangose in quel pantano,
111  ignude tutte, con sembiante offeso.

112  Queste si percotean non pur con mano,
113  ma con la testa e col petto e coi piedi,
114  troncandosi co' denti a brano a brano.

115  Lo buon maestro disse: “Figlio, or vedi
116  l'anime di color cui vinse l'ira;
117  e anche vo' che tu per certo credi

118  che sotto l'acqua è gente che sospira,
119  e fanno pullular quest' acqua al summo,
120  come l'occhio ti dice, u' che s'aggira.

121  Fitti nel limo dicon: 'Tristi fummo
122  ne l'aere dolce che dal sol s'allegra,
123  portando dentro accidïoso fummo:

124  or ci attristiam ne la belletta negra.'
125  Quest' inno si gorgoglian ne la strozza,
126  ché dir nol posson con parola integra.”
97  Let us descend now unto greater woe;
98  Already sinks each star that was ascending
99  When I set out, and loitering is forbidden."
100  We crossed the circle to the other bank,
101  Near to a fount that boils, and pours itself
102  Along a gully that runs out of it.
103  The water was more sombre far than perse;
104  And we, in company with the dusky waves,
105  Made entrance downward by a path uncouth.
106  A marsh it makes, which has the name of Styx,
107  This tristful brooklet, when it has descended
108  Down to the foot of the malign gray shores.
109  And I, who stood intent upon beholding,
110  Saw people mud-besprent in that lagoon,
111  All of them naked and with angry look.
112  They smote each other not alone with hands,
113  But with the head and with the breast and feet,
114  Tearing each other piecemeal with their teeth.
115  Said the good Master: "Son, thou now beholdest
116  The souls of those whom anger overcame;
117  And likewise I would have thee know for certain
118  Beneath the water people are who sigh
119  And make this water bubble at the surface,
120  As the eye tells thee wheresoe'er it turns.
121  Fixed in the mire they say, 'We sullen were
122  In the sweet air, which by the sun is gladdened,
123  Bearing within ourselves the sluggish reek;
124  Now we are sullen in this sable mire.'
125  This hymn do they keep gurgling in their throats,
126  For with unbroken words they cannot say it."
Yeat's line "What's water but the generated soul," comes to mind as the poet protagonists descend along the rivulet of the Styx, following its sluggish course to a gaseous swamp.  Along this downward way, they encounter as a sort of symmetrical bookend to the opening of the canto with the Spenders and Hoarders, this second bookend being the Wrathful and Sullen.  It is easy enough to understand the battle of the wrathful, those people who are what they call in Neuro-linguistic Programming polarity responders.  If you say it's a nice day, they say it's rotten.  If you say it's black, they say it's white.  Having reduced their entire personalities to this residue of constant rage, their reactivity dooms them to perpetual war with those who are like themselves, or with other aspects of themselves.  They are naked, because the usual ornaments of clothes, i.e., civilized tact, modesty, and manners have been stripped from them, and the text makes it clear that their war is not guided by any subterranean set of Queensbury rules — theirs is just no holds barred cage-fighting, and to make it even more primitive, and disgusting, they tear themselves limb from limb (brano a brano) with their teeth.  They are nowhere as pure as animals — because an animal's violence is about obtaining food or sex — and their violence is only the pointless expression of ire.
While the Wrathful fight with each other, their counterparts, the Sullen, let their anger crater inward, as a sort of blackhole of surliness, which depresses everyone around them.  Like the gluttons we saw in Canto VI (the third circle), they are submerged — out of sight — except for the bubbles that reveal their ineffectual attempts at speech.  Sullenness and gluttony share this attribute: they are errors that lead to torpor, to a cess pool, where healthy circulation is arrested, and only a continual sinking in the mire is possible.  If the glutton is submerged in his own filth, the sullen are drowned in their own rancor.
We began this canto with Pluto's nonsense curses and we end it with the even greater inarticulateness of the sullen, whose words die in their throats, only to be released as noxious belches.   
127  Così girammo de la lorda pozza
128  grand' arco, tra la ripa secca e 'l mézzo,
129  con li occhi vòlti a chi del fango ingozza.

130  Venimmo al piè d'una torre al da sezzo.

127  Thus we went circling round the filthy fen
128  A great arc 'twixt the dry bank and the swamp,
129  With eyes turned unto those who gorge the mire;

130  Unto the foot of a tower we came at last.

The last of this canto is a bridge to the next, but there is still the circling motif (Così girammo de la lorda pozza — thus we went circling round the filthy den) to bring us there, and the last line (130), with its emphasis Coming on foot (Venimmo al piè) shows Dante's subtle skill in arranging proportions.  We look down to the swamp and the feet, but up to the tower, which has grown from this swamp, as if from a malevolent seed, as a beacon of something more horrible to come.   We also see this gullet-like reference to the passage through hell in the phrase con li occhi vòlti a chi del fango ingozza (with eyes turned to those which gorge the mire).  Again we are inside the body of hell, a body which is swallowing us like a bolus of undigestible food — inside, down, and around and around, that's the direction we keep heading.


Canto VIII

Bridge Material

The Towers and their signaling

Possible retrograde time: returning to the confrontation with Phlegyas

Confrontation with Filippo Argenti

Dante's denunciation of Argenti, Virgil's praise, and Dante's wish to see Argenti's punishment

Passage to Dis

Scene at the entrance of Dis, the flashback ended, and the possible return of progressive time.  Testing of faith, and recoiling back to doubt and to previous sections of the Inferno

Preliminary notes: Some commentators say that the approach to the tower ending Canto VII, and the towers referred to at the beginning of this Canto, are in real progressive time, and the confrontation with Phlegyas and Argenti, and the passage across the Styx are in retrograde time, or, in modern parlance, flashbacks.  This primarily is due to the fact that the tower is presumed to be a part of the walled city of Dis.  However, if there is a forward signaling tower not attached to the city's walls, there is no need to assume that the Phlegyas and Argenti episodes are flashbacks.  Either interpretation does not appreciably change the readings of these episodes, or even Dante's view of time, since we indeed have had flashbacks before, for example, in Virgil's recounting of Beatrice's intervention in Canto II of Inferno.

We should also note at the outset that this is a political canto, Argenti was a political player, possibly involved in Dante's exile, and the confiscation of his property, and of course there is the city of Dis itself, whose citizens are the fallen, rebellious angels.  We should also remember that the word politics is derived from the word polis, and it refers to the city and the governing of the city, which in his life in Florence, was Dante's passion and profession.  He found out, as his protagonist and literary effigy in this canto finds out, that the polis cannot be managed by any individual, or group of individuals, or political party.  The polis is a all-consuming self-developing, self-annihilating entity, which uses its citizens according to the whims of Fortuna, that goddess praised by Virgil in the previous canto, whose actions, although Divinely ordained, may completely override the intentions and actions of human beings, whether virtuous or villainous.  Now, we, who live in live in the midst of political turmoil ourselves, have a spiritual lesson to learn from this whole canto, and what that lesson is, is embodied, rather cynically perhaps, in the entire fabric of these one-hundred and thirty lines of verse.

1  Io dico, seguitando, ch'assai prima
2  che noi fossimo al piè de l'alta torre,
3  li occhi nostri n'andar suso a la cima

4  per due fiammette che i vedemmo porre,
5  e un'altra da lungi render cenno,
6  tanto ch'a pena il potea l'occhio tòrre.

7  E io mi volsi al mar di tutto 'l senno;
8  dissi: “Questo che dice? e che risponde
9  quell' altro foco? e chi son quei che 'l fenno?”

10  Ed elli a me: “Su per le sucide onde
11  già scorgere puoi quello che s'aspetta,
12  se 'l fummo del pantan nol ti nasconde.”
1  I say, continuing, that long before
2  We to the foot of that high tower had come,
3  Our eyes went upward to the summit of it,
4  By reason of two flamelets we saw placed there,
5  And from afar another answer them,
6  So far, that hardly could the eye attain it.
7  And, to the sea of all discernment turned,
8  I said: "What sayeth this, and what respondeth
9  That other fire? and who are they that made it?"
10  And he to me: "Across the turbid waves
11  What is expected thou canst now discern,
12  If reek of the morass conceal it not."
Unlike the previous cantos (lust, gluttony) where a certain circle of hell was illuminated in the confines of one canto, in Canto VII, we passed from the circle of the hoarders and wastrels to the circle of the wrathful/sullen, and here, Dante, the author, with another peek behind the curtain, tells us we are continuing along that path.  The tower that we saw at the end of Canto VII is now approached, but now the tower has two signals flames at its summit, and the poet/protagonists see in the far distance a second tower signaling back.  Apparently, commentators have had quite a wrangle over the centuries trying to pin down just what this signaling is about, and, of course, what the towers themselves might "mean".
Here communications are not even the word-salad of Pluto, but have degenerated to an ambiguous primitive signaling.  The word eye(s) (occhi/occhio) appears in line 3, and also in line 6 — far apart, just like the towers themselves, and with two small flames at the top of a tower, it is easy to imagine that these flames are eyes atop the spine and torso of an inert body, so that we have two Giant Forms (to use Blakean terminology) signaling to each other without the human attribute of speech across the swamp of the Styx.  The etymology of the name Styx is from a Greek word stugien, meaning hateful.  And this, indeed, is a hateful place, literally full of the wrathful and sullen who are doomed to be mired in its mire.  But returning to the towers — what do the signals mean?  My interpretation is that the two flames are telling Phlegyas that two enemies are approaching.  And he sets out in his small boat to intercept them.  Like the other monstrous guardians that the protagonists have encountered, he will try to prevent them from proceeding deeper into hell.  Occult literature almost always has guardians at the gate of forbidden, or at least dangerous knowledge, to prevent both intrusion and the misuse of that knowledge by those who are not ready for it.  The more profound the knowledge, or let us say, the experience which could lead to knowledge, the more fierce the guardian.      

13  Corda non pinse mai da sé saetta
14  che sì corresse via per l'aere snella,
15  com' io vidi una nave piccioletta

16  venir per l'acqua verso noi in quella,
17  sotto 'l governo d'un sol galeoto,
18  che gridava: “Or se' giunta, anima fella!”

19  “Flegïàs, Flegïàs, tu gridi a vòto”
20  disse lo mio segnore, “a questa volta:
21  più non ci avrai che sol passando il loto.”

22  Qual è colui che grande inganno ascolta
23  che li sia fatto, e poi se ne rammarca,
24  fecesi Flegïàs ne l'ira accolta.

25  Lo duca mio discese ne la barca,
26  e poi mi fece intrare appresso lui;
27  e sol quand' io fui dentro parve carca.

28  Tosto che 'l duca e io nel legno fui,
29  segando se ne va l'antica prora
30  de l'acqua più che non suol con altrui.

13  Cord never shot an arrow from itself
14  That sped away athwart the air so swift,
15  As I beheld a very little boat

16  Come o'er the water tow'rds us at that moment,
17  Under the guidance of a single pilot,
18  Who shouted, "Now art thou arrived, fell soul?"

19  "Phlegyas, Phlegyas, thou criest out in vain
20  For this once," said my Lord; "thou shalt not have us
21  Longer than in the passing of the slough."

22  As he who listens to some great deceit
23  That has been done to him, and then resents it,
24  Such became Phlegyas, in his gathered wrath.

25  My Guide descended down into the boat,
26  And then he made me enter after him,
27 And only when I entered seemed it laden.

28  Soon as the Guide and I were in the boat,
29  The antique prow goes on its way, dividing
30  More of the water than 'tis wont with others.

The confrontation with Phlegyas, like others we've seen with Charon, Minos, and Pluto is one wherein an adversary who comes to obstruct or punish, is turned into a reluctant ally, a strange mutation, in which the emotional energy of a perverted purpose is re-directed inwardly towards a positive goal: in this case spiritual transformation.  Here, as we shall see later in the canto, the transfromation is from self-destructive wrath to righteous wrath.  Phlegyas, a king, whose daughter was raped by Apollo (literally ravaged by the light), in an act of vengeance, burned down the Temple of Apollo at Delphi — a sin against the light, and for this transgression, he is doomed to an eternity of rage.  His job: to help punish the wrathful.  Phlegyas arrives in his small boat which travels swifter than an arrow in flight across the fetid waters.  Self-animated boats are a regular feature of the Commedia, and we might learn from this that these crafts stand for some kind of agency of fate, not quite alive in themselves, but not quite dead matter either.  In dreams, of course, one is quite familiar with this sort of quasi animation of objects, and not only in dreams.  Think of the sentimental attachment that one acquires about an object, or an article of clothing.  The things we have and the things we make both enable and restrict us in unexpected ways.  At any rate, whatever this boat is, it is not an entirely insubstantial shade, as are Virgil and Phlegyas, for it reacts physically to Dante's physicality when he steps into it, and it displaces more water (lines 27, 30).   Upon seeing the poet protagonists, Phlegyas shouts — I believe in a rather mechanical way — as if, like some sort of demonic, will-less automaton, he repeats the same phrase to all who arrive for his condemnation: “Or se' giunta, anima fella!” — Now art thou arrived, fell soul (line 18)).  He must only be addressing Virgil, for only Virgil is a soul, Dante being still a living person.  Does he know Virgil?  The word or — now, seems to imply something like: At last you have arrived, evil soul.  Virgil had written about him in the Aeneid, and placed him in Tartarus, so that might be the reference.  If so, Phlegyas, in a manner typical of him, wants his revenge, just as he wanted his revenge against Apollo.  But more than anything here, Phlegyas shows us that his moral world has reversed poles.  For him evil is good, good evil, as he reveals in lines 22 - 24, when he feels deceived and wrathful as soon as he discovers that he is confronted by reason and virtue, and not by sin.  Evil hates good, and good hates evil, and as we proceed in this canto, we see just how virulent that mutual hatred is.   

31  Mentre noi corravam la morta gora,
32  dinanzi mi si fece un pien di fango,
33  e disse: “Chi se' tu che vieni anzi ora?”

34  E io a lui: “S'i' vegno, non rimango;
35  ma tu chi se', che sì se' fatto brutto?”
36  Rispuose: “Vedi che son un che piango.”

37  E io a lui: “Con piangere e con lutto,
38  spirito maladetto, ti rimani;
39  ch'i' ti conosco, ancor sie lordo tutto.”

40  Allor distese al legno ambo le mani;
41  per che 'l maestro accorto lo sospinse,
42  dicendo: “Via costà con li altri cani!”

31  While we were running through the dead canal,
32  Uprose in front of me one full of mire,
33  And said, "Who 'rt thou that comest ere the hour?"

34  And I to him: "Although I come, I stay not;
35  But who art thou that hast become so squalid?"
36  "Thou seest that I am one who weeps," he answered.

37  And I to him: "With weeping and with wailing,
38  Thou spirit maledict, do thou remain;
39  For thee I know, though thou art all defiled."

40  Then stretched he both his hands unto the boat;
41  Whereat my wary Master thrust him back,
42  Saying, "Away there with the other dogs!"

As we have seen before, the encounter with — at this point — unnamed denizen of this swamp — this toilet — begins with the question of recognition and identity.  But something happens here with Dante that did not happen with Francesca or Ciacco.  Here when the sinner answers in lieu of his name, which we discover Dante already knows, he says, Vedi che son un che piango — thou seest that I am one who weeps.  And Dante, instead of sympathy, offers insult, and an angry hope for retribution.  Quite a change in the aspirant's, response.  Anger here meets anger, and we are reminded of the response that Phlegyas had when at first confronting the poets.  It's the same scene, in terms of confrontation, recognition, and defiance, but what a difference!  Gratuitous self-serving wrath is something quite different than righteous indignation — as St. Augustine has said, although the affect in a physiological sense is quite the same.  

The sinner tries to climb into the boat, and Virgil thrusts him back into the mire, again with an insult: Via costà con li altri cani! — Away there with the other dogs!  All of this is straight forward enough, but I want to make a little digression here on the insult itself, specifically, why is this sinner likened to a dog?  It might be argued that idiomatic expressions come ready to hand and that everybody knows what they mean without having to think about it.  That's true, but if we allow ourselves to delve into them, as we have also delved into expressions thought to be original, we find that a master, like Dante, uses these expressions with an exactitude by which his own genius is adept at utilizing the collective linguistic genius in ways that do not flatten the text with a trite expression, but which, on the contrary, give the reader pause, and occasions them to think more deeply about why such an idiom would have such common usage in the first place.  Grand shows of emotion are common with demagogues, and by saying what he says here, the sinner gives us a clue as to how he was in life, i.e., one who fabricates a response designed to give himself some advantage.  The talk of such people is only thought out to the extent that it is designed to influence the listener, not to the listener's advantage, or even to some mutual advantage, but solely for the speaker's selfish ends.  The speech lacks articulation and eloquence, and in that sense it resembles barking, yelping, growling, whining — and so forth — in short, it is the kind of speech that is dog-like in so far as only an affect is communicated — as with Pluto's outburst at the beginning of the previous canto — and it elicits a like affect in the listeners.  This is speech empty of content, designed often in political rhetoric to hide intent, and to drive the listener back to the most visceral and uncritical of responses.  It is the speech of the con.  In the myth of Pandora, she is sometimes described with the epithet "doggish."  And what exactly is such a dog?  Shameless.  Without inhibition dogs eat carrion, defecate, urinate, fornicate, sniff each other’s butts, spread disease, and when rabid, attack with indiscriminate rage.  And although dogs are often considered to be, of all animals, most like humans, because of all animals they are the most intimate in participating in human communities, families, and relationships, when humans are compared to them in a derogatory sense, as Virgil does here, then these negative attributes of the species come to mind, and we are repulsed. 

43  Lo collo poi con le braccia mi cinse;
44  basciommi 'l volto e disse: “Alma sdegnosa,
45  benedetta colei che 'n te s'incinse!

46  Quei fu al mondo persona orgogliosa;
47  bontà non è che sua memoria fregi:
48  così s'è l'ombra sua qui furïosa.

49  Quanti si tegnon or là sù gran regi
50  che qui staranno come porci in brago,
51  di sé lasciando orribili dispregi!”

52  E io: “Maestro, molto sarei vago
53  di vederlo attuffare in questa broda
54  prima che noi uscissimo del lago.”

55  Ed elli a me: “Avante che la proda
56  ti si lasci veder, tu sarai sazio:
57  di tal disïo convien che tu goda.”

58  Dopo ciò poco vid' io quello strazio
59  far di costui a le fangose genti,
60  che Dio ancor ne lodo e ne ringrazio.

61  Tutti gridavano: “A Filippo Argenti!”
62  e 'l fiorentino spirito bizzarro
63  in sé medesmo si volvea co' denti.

64  Quivi il lasciammo, che più non ne narro;
65  ma ne l'orecchie mi percosse un duolo,
66  per ch'io avante l'occhio intento sbarro.

43  Thereafter with his arms he clasped my neck;
44  He kissed my face, and said: "Disdainful soul,
45  Blessed be she who bore thee in her bosom.

46  That was an arrogant person in the world;
47  Goodness is none, that decks his memory;
48  So likewise here his shade is furious.

49  How many are esteemed great kings up there,
50  Who here shall be like unto swine in mire,
51  Leaving behind them horrible dispraises!"

52  And I: "My Master, much should I be pleased,
53  If I could see him soused into this broth,
54  Before we issue forth out of the lake."

55  And he to me: "Ere unto thee the shore
56  Reveal itself, thou shalt be satisfied;
57  Such a desire 'tis meet thou shouldst enjoy."

58  A little after that, I saw such havoc
59  Made of him by the people of the mire,
60  That still I praise and thank my God for it.

61  They all were shouting, "At Philippo Argenti!"
62  And that exasperate spirit Florentine
63  Turned round upon himself with his own teeth.

64  We left him there, and more of him I tell not;
65  But on mine ears there smote a lamentation,
66  Whence forward I intent unbar mine eyes.

So many issues — poetic, moral, theological, political, familial — are summoned forth by these 24 lines, perhaps it would be best to try to summarize them in the form of a few questions.  I'm going to use the Christian theological word sinner, because that is how Dante refers to them.  But if the reader would prefer another term: the waywards, the transgressors, the criminally insane, and so forth, then she or he should feel free to substitute them.  One could write a book on any of these questions — and people have found — and still find that such questions have about them a proliferating quality which eludes definitive resolutions.  What Dante does here, and elsewhere throughout the Commedia, is present a tableaux that is contextual and textual.  That is to say, as in a dream, certain language and image games are set in dynamic motion to bedevil, engage, alert, and evolve those who encounter that tableaux.  Let us consider some of the features of that tableaux. 

Dante rejects the sinner, wishes him continued punishment, and although the soul is known to him, he refuses to name him, or give the sinner the comfort of fame or identity.

Virgil embraces Dante for his action, with an epithet echoing a reference to Jesus as the fruit of Mary's womb —  a reference to a divine personage as part of a human community or family.

Virgil thrusts the sinner back into the mire, with the other "dogs", in effect excluding the sinner from the human family with its divine connections.

Virgil tells of people in positions of power who enjoyed approbation on earth, and who are now degraded in hell — yet they continue to suffer the dispraises of infamy which presumably increases their hellish reward.  (Again the motif of praise or dispraise as instrument of fame or infamy.)

Dante, the protagonist, asks his mentor if he might have the privilege of seeing the sinner punished.  Virgil promises that boon; the sinner is identified and punished further by the other sinners, and also by biting himself.  Dante, thanks God for the enjoyment he has received, and continues to take delight in the memory of this enjoyment as if his act of Schadenfreude is in itself an ongoing blessing.

Dante hears a crescendoing lamentation, and deliberately and intently tries to see those who are in distress.

Some questions which arise from this tableaux: 
 
What should be the response of the righteous to the punishment of the sinner?  Sympathy? — as with Dante's sympathy for Francesca and Ciacco —  or anger? — as it is here. 

Should the righteous be involved in the punishment of the sinner?

Is it a virtue to condemn and punish?

Is there a point when all human attributes are consumed by sin, and the sinner falls out of the human family, becoming a cur, or rabid dog, as Virgil refers to Argenti here?

Does one's influence as a leader, a king, a prelate, or maybe even a poet, subject one to greater praise or punishment according to the fruits of one's actions or the purity or evil of one's intentions.

Should the righteous find delight in seeing the pain of transgressors?  

Can one visit, see, or read about hell, not for edification, but for delight?  

Does an affect — in this case of wrath — differ according to whether the wrath has a righteous or insidious purpose?

Is this righteous anger a necessary stage in a journey toward transcendence, where presumably, like Beatrice, the sufferings of hell no longer disturb the peace of beatitude? 

Should sinners be used for the Divine purpose of punishing one another?  Should sinners be used to punish themselves?

How is the post-mortem or post-offense affected by the praise or condemnation of others, specifically the communities of the living, or the non-offenders?

How does poetry evoke these issues?  And how does a poetic embodiment of them differ from a theological, psychological, or political didactic or propagandistic prose exhibition?  

Can we discern if the poet's intent is ironic, or is only the reader's interpretation ironic, parodic, or straightforward?

How does what has or will happen in the poem prior to or after this tableaux affect its meaning or our interpretation?

One of the reasons that the poet Dante is as great as he is, and his poem has had as much lasting influence as it has had, is that its text invades the reader's psyche and elicits these proliferating questions.  That is why the text is not only transcendent in itself, but a catalyst for the reader's transcendence.  That is why exegesis is both necessary and inevitable for any serious reading of the poem.  It would be easily possible for me, or any reader, to return to this brief tableaux, and these questions, and explicate all of these issues with references inside the poem and/or with events and readings suggested by the poem or by the day's news, or historically, or by episodes in my own or any other person's life.  That is the power of this poetry: it refuses finality, and invites a plunge into infinity.  It exercises the reader's reason, imagination, emotions, and moral sense in ways that continue to engage even after the book is closed.  The reading of this text can never be completed, and what's more, we never want it to be completed.   

67  Lo buon maestro disse: “Omai, figliuolo,
68  'appressa la città c'ha nome Dite,
69  coi gravi cittadin, col grande stuolo.”

70  E io: “Maestro, già le sue meschite
71  là entro certe ne la valle cerno,
72  vermiglie come se di foco uscite

73  fossero.” Ed ei mi disse: “Il foco etterno
74  ch'entro l'affoca le dimostra rosse,
75  come tu vedi in questo basso inferno.”

76  Noi pur giugnemmo dentro a l'alte fosse
77  che vallan quella terra sconsolata:
78  le mura mi parean che ferro fosse.

79  Non sanza prima far grande aggirata,
80  venimmo in parte dove il nocchier forte
81  “Usciteci,” gridò: “qui è l'intrata.”

67  And the good Master said: "Even now, my Son,
68  The city draweth near whose name is Dis,
69  With the grave citizens, with the great throng."

70  And I: "Its mosques already, Master, clearly
71  Within there in the valley I discern
72  Vermilion, as if issuing from the fire

73  They were." And he to me: "The fire eternal
74  That kindles them within makes them look red,
75  As thou beholdest in this nether Hell."

76  Then we arrived within the moats profound,
77  That circumvallate that disconsolate city;
78  The walls appeared to me to be of iron.

79  Not without making first a circuit wide,
80  We came unto a place where loud the pilot
81  Cried out to us, "Debark, here is the entrance."

You are the director of a movie, and you have just finished a scene in which your two protagonists are in a small boat piloted at great speed through murky, sewage water, by a resentful demon who would do harm if he dared.  Suddenly an accusatory voice rings out and asks one of your heroes, focusing on the weaker of the two, who he thinks he is, and why is he here.  A disgustingly squalid body rises out of the muck.  Quick close-up cuts from a bemired anguished face, and a horrified angry face.  There are contending shouts, the bemired one attempts to climb into the boat, he is thrust back with curses, and creatures like the one you have just spurned rise out of the festering swamp, and attack the would-be interloper, shouting his name, swirling through the waters in fast action close-ups, grimacing faces, body and face wounds, teeth, nails, fists, the one under attack is even biting himself — you want to make this struggle as desperate and as dangerous as great crocodiles fighting to the death.  Your protagonists are breathing heavily, the crocks slide under the gurgling reek of the swamp water, the horrible lamentations of the their cries begin to fade as your craft distances itself from them.  Now the camera slows and makes long pans of a distant shore, the walls are of molten iron, and the towers of this city in the distance loom upward through the gloom as the great minarets of a hostile creed.  Everything glows vermillion or darkens to red, casting the twisting reflections of flame on the surly waters.  The pan pulls back and up, and the screen shows just how infinitesimal the little boat  is in comparison to the great demonic city.  Now the shot changes to what seems a long slow glide along an interminable glowing wall.  The camera circles round as the boat navigates a twisting, circling series of dead canals which serve as moats to defend the city.  The weaker protagonist looks aghast; he looks back, but the way back is now shrouded in darkness.  The older protagonist looks steadfast, but concerned.  The pilot of the boat, with an incensed expression, swings the craft round in a wide arc, pulls into a suddenly appearing slip, and shouts for his passengers to get out.  A huge gate looms up and up, like a solid wall of flames woven more tightly than any chainmail.  The background music, ominous and pounding, rises to a crescendo.  You have arrived at Dis.

Essentially, what the text is doing here, in these 30 lines, is slowing down, and giving us a long, alarming look at the City of Dis, and this is Dante's great skill, managing mood, through violence and tension, and subtly juggling  proportionalities from close to far, fast to slow, small to large in such a way that that mood, and in this case all the anxiety which goes with, is transferred to the reader.  Everything is masterfully paced, and background and foreground, relationships and geography, emotions and reason, action and dialog, philosophy and description shuffle from one to another with a stage magician's legerdemain.

Note: All through the Commedia Time and Space have been handled in a curious way, in so far as Time, while mostly following a sequential order at the poets move through the landscape of the dead, outpaces itself.  Everywhere the space is clearly much too large for the amount of time allotted for its traversal.  In other words, Time is expanded enormously, minutes and hours, conforming to the immense distances of the spaces described.  I suspect that this effect is a common one in any reading or fiction, in that the so-called dramatic unities are usually accepted unconsciously by the reader because this is also a feature of memory, shrinking or expanding time and space in relation to one another to match an emotion, which unfolds as quickly or slowly in whatever space it needs to fulfill itself.    

82  Io vidi più di mille in su le porte
83  da ciel piovuti, che stizzosamente
84  dicean: “Chi è costui che sanza morte

85  va per lo regno de la morta gente?”
86  E 'l savio mio maestro fece segno
87  di voler lor parlar segretamente.

88  Allor chiusero un poco il gran disdegno
89  e disser: “Vien tu solo, e quei sen vada
90  che sì ardito intrò per questo regno.

91  Sol si ritorni per la folle strada:
92  pruovi, se sa; ché tu qui rimarrai,
93  che li ha' iscorta sì buia contrada.”

82  More than a thousand at the gates I saw
83  Out of the Heavens rained down, who angrily
84  Were saying, "Who is this that without death

85  Goes through the kingdom of the people dead?"
86  And my sagacious Master made a sign
87  Of wishing secretly to speak with them.

88  A little then they quelled their great disdain,
89  And said: "Come thou alone, and he begone
90  Who has so boldly entered these dominions.

91  Let him return alone by his mad road;
92  Try, if he can; for thou shalt here remain,
93  Who hast escorted him through such dark regions."

Now all those helpless birds that were buffeted about in the circle of lust have become more than a thousand hellish harpies, raining down from the dark smoke billows of an ironic heaven underlit from the flames of this city of molten iron.  It is almost as if these demons were some kind of evil condensate of the toxic smoke.  And once again the challenge comes: Who is this that without death goes through the kingdom of the people dead — Chi è costui che sanza morte / va per lo regno de la morta gente?”  The tercets run together, so that the speed of the poetry, as it had slowed to express the awesome dimensions of the terrible city, now picks up again, as this cloud of the rebellious, fallen angels hovers over the protagonists, like a Greek chorus in the rack of heaven, dissonantly declaiming.  It is the first time the the poets have been confronted not by a single demon, but by a huge squadron of them.  And now, also for the first time in the their descent, the poets are not only threatened as a pair, but are each singled out for a threat designed most to terrify them.  Dante is told to retrace his steps on the mad road (la folle strada) he has taken to this place — which of course the reader will see at once is impossible, for he and his guide have already crossed too many Rubicons, already left too many angry guardians behind them, and Virgil is told that here, in Dis, he will remain, no longer one of the unpunished damned of limbo, but doomed to reside in this land of interminable tortures.
 
94  Pensa, lettor, se io mi sconfortai
95  nel suon de le parole maladette,
96  ché non credetti ritornarci mai.

97  “O caro duca mio, che più di sette
98  volte m'hai sicurtà renduta e tratto
99  d'alto periglio che 'ncontra mi stette,

100  non mi lasciar,” diss' io, “così disfatto;
101  e se 'l passar più oltre ci è negato,
102  ritroviam l'orme nostre insieme ratto.”

103  E quel segnor che lì m'avea menato,
104  mi disse: “Non temer; ché 'l nostro passo
105  non ci può tòrre alcun: da tal n'è dato.

106  Ma qui m'attendi, e lo spirito lasso
107  conforta e ciba di speranza buona,
108  ch'i' non ti lascerò nel mondo basso.”

109  Così sen va, e quivi m'abbandona
110  lo dolce padre, e io rimagno in forse,
111  che sì e no nel capo mi tenciona.

94  Think, Reader, if I was discomforted
95  At utterance of the accursed words;
96  For never to return here I believed.

97  "O my dear Guide, who more than seven times
98  Hast rendered me security, and drawn me
99  From imminent peril that before me stood,

100  Do not desert me," said I, "thus undone;
101  And if the going farther be denied us,
102  Let us retrace our steps together swiftly."

103  And that Lord, who had led me thitherward,
104  Said unto me: "Fear not; because our passage
105  None can take from us, it by Such is given.

106  But here await me, and thy weary spirit
107  Comfort and nourish with a better hope;
108  For in this nether world I will not leave thee."

109  So onward goes and there abandons me
110  My Father sweet, and I remain in doubt,
111  For No and Yes within my head contend.

The poets finally reach an insurmountable obstacle.  And that is the main question that occupies the text for the remainder of this canto.  Back and forth, up and down, round and round — the morphological components  of the text, the reader's attention from the very first of the canto going down to the feet of the protagonists and up to the flame-signals at the top of the tower, going round and round as they circumnavigate Dis in Phlegyas boat, and here, most tellingly, going back and forth as Virgil goes to the gates to speak to the demons, and then back to Dante.  So the aspirant, Dante, is tossed back and forth on the horns of a double-bind dilemma.  Terrified, he realizes in line 96 that going back is impossible, and yet later he does suggest in line 102 that they quickly retrace their steps.  There is, in addition, a back and forth dialogue between the reader and the writer, as the text makes a direct appeal to the reader to share the aspirant/protagonist's feelings about this impasse (line 94).  This is a test of faith.  Up to now the aspirant could always rely on Virgil's reason and the journey's divine sanctioning to overcome the demons who stood in the way of their spiritual progress.  But that is not the case here as they attempt to penetrate the deepest levels of hell.  No or Yes contend with equal ferocity in the condition of DOUBT (line 111), and we are reminded as we face these hordes of fallen angels of the other place in the text where we have met hordes of angels, namely, in Canto III, where the indecisive angels were anguishing in the ante-room of hell.  Again, the reader's attention, is taken back.  It's significant too that this No or Yes battle takes place in the head (nel capo) presumably where reason should reside, and not in the heart, the seat of emotion.  To be abandoned by reason throws the emotions into a Charybdis sea of oscillations.

112  Udir non potti quello ch'a lor porse;
113  ma ei non stette là con essi guari,
114  che ciascun dentro a pruova si ricorse.

115  Chiuser le porte que' nostri avversari
116  nel petto al mio segnor, che fuor rimase
117  e rivolsesi a me con passi rari.

118  Li occhi a la terra e le ciglia avea rase
119  d'ogne baldanza, e dicea ne' sospiri:
120  “Chi m'ha negate le dolenti case!”

121  E a me disse: “Tu, perch' io m'adiri,
122  non sbigottir, ch'io vincerò la prova,
123  qual ch'a la difension dentro s'aggiri.

124  Questa lor tracotanza non è nova;
125  ché già l'usaro a men segreta porta,
126  la qual sanza serrame ancor si trova.

127  Sovr' essa vedestù la scritta morta:
128  e già di qua da lei discende l'erta,
129  passando per li cerchi sanza scorta,

130  tal che per lui ne fia la terra aperta.”

112  I could not hear what he proposed to them;
113  But with them there he did not linger long,
114  Ere each within in rivalry ran back.

115  They closed the portals, those our adversaries,
116  On my Lord's breast, who had remained without
117  And turned to me with footsteps far between.

118  His eyes cast down, his forehead shorn had he
119  Of all its boldness, and he said, with sighs,
120  "Who has denied to me the dolesome houses?"

121  And unto me: "Thou, because I am angry,
122  Fear not, for I will conquer in the trial,
123  Whatever for defence within be planned.

124  This arrogance of theirs is nothing new;
125  For once they used it at less secret gate,
126  Which finds itself without a fastening still.

127  O'er it didst thou behold the dead inscription;
128  And now this side of it descends the steep,
129  Passing across the circles without escort,

130  One by whose means the city shall be opened."

How should the city, the body-politic, this thing which takes on a life of its own — more the Moloch here which devours its citizens than a mother who nourishes them — be penetrated?  This is the final question of Canto VIII.  How should the body-politic be opened to our understanding?  And is it, this body politic of hell, something that can be lived through, if not in, by one, who by the operations of fate — i.e. Fortuna — finds himself there, or finds himself, as Dante did, exiled from there.   Someone is coming, alone, to break this lock, and reveal the guts of this mystery, which has remained impervious to reason.  But for now, we do not know who this someone is, so this a time of waiting, a time of immersing oneself in the condition of expectation, a time when one must rely on faith, not facts.  This is the condition of the protagonists and the reader at the end of the this canto.

Let's look at some of the text's details and see how Dante, the poet, casts the reader about in these final lines, literally turning our minds back to previous episodes in the Inferno, and throwing up barriers to any vision that we might have of a way forward in the narrative.  The text goes backward, recoils in a way, to gather the strength of faith, and wait, in a state of unresolve, but with faith, on how we might eventually be able to proceed.  As Virgil abandons his protégé to have a parley with the demons, there is a device wherein the aspirant cannot hear the results of that conversation.  I am reminded of all those scenes in Hitchcock movies where tension is ratcheted up when the protagonists cannot hear a conversation, perhaps because it is behind a sheet of glass or spoken in a foreign language, and that is what happens here too (line 112).  The gate is shut on Virgil's chest (petto), the seat of the heart, the emotions, and as Virgil goes back to his protégé, the demons to go back (si recorse), as the translator puts  it in rivalry - a pruova, presumably squabbling with one another, but also testing, proving, the faith of the protagonists with their obstinate refusal.  And just as the reader went back to Canto III to the doubting indecisive angels, here, when Virgil returns with the Christ-like phrase Ch'i m'ha negate le dolente case (who has denied to me the dolesome houses), we think of the doubt that Jesus expressed in his last moments of agony on the cross: Oh Lord, why hast thou forsaken me, where the Christ himself goes back to quote from Psalms 22:1.  And although Virgil states that they will get around (s'aggiri) whatever defense the demons have mounted, it will not be by his power, the power of reason, that they will be able to do so.  Virgil, in this circle of the wrathful, has succumbed to wrath (line 121), and wrath is Kryptonite to reason.  The canto ends as Virgil promises Dante that they are to await the one who comes alone across the wastes of hell to rescue them, which takes us back to Canto IV, where Christ is seen harrowing hell, and rescuing the unbaptized but worthy souls born before the incarnation.  Virgil takes Dante's mind back to the entrance to hell, a gate that Christ permanently opened, the operational word being segreta (secret), because the spiritual path is closed, secret, to those who have not tested their faith and accepted the unknowable aspects of experience, as we saw also back in Canto VII, with the discussion of Fortune.  And here we are, waiting, waiting, waiting, in the back and forth, up and down, round and round condition of uncertainty, but waiting in faith for our salvation.  This retrograde motion of the reader's attention which began this canto with events preceding those of the previous canto, mainly the approach to the tower, now also symmetrically ends it.

Canto IX
Structural armature:

Hypnotic Induction and a cry for help

Virgil's doubt, Dante's fear

Virgil's story about his previous visit to Hell's depths
	the comparison between magic and miracle, 
	attempting to compel fate or allowing grace to unfold

The appearance of the messanger

The entrance into the City of Dis and the view of the sepulchers of the heresiarchs

1  Quel color che viltà di fuor mi pinse
2  veggendo il duca mio tornare in volta,
3  più tosto dentro il suo novo ristrinse.

4  Attento si fermò com' uom ch'ascolta;
5  ché l'occhio nol potea menare a lunga
6  per l'aere nero e per la nebbia folta.

7  That hue which cowardice brought out on me,
8  Beholding my Conductor backward turn,
9  Sooner repressed within him his new colour.

10  He stopped attentive, like a man who listens,
11  Because the eye could not conduct him far
12  Through the black air, and through the heavy fog.

The canto starts with an extreme visual close-up, first of Dante's face, then of Virgil’s:  Dante's the color of fear, Virgil's presumably flushed from the anger he displayed when repulsed by the demons at the gate of Dis.  A white/red contrast, but Virgil averts his face (tonare in volta), and composes himself to such a degree that the color goes from his face, and yet, as we shall see as we proceed in the next few lines, the doubt from his split mind is still there: i.e., Was Beatrice wrong about the protected and ordained nature of their quest?  Then, after this close-up in the visual modality, we switch to listening, because the black air and thick fog (l'aere e per nebbia folta), hamper the operations of the eyes.  This then is the hear/see or see/hear motif which we have read of before throughout these first cantos of the Inferno, and I think it's clear that Dante understands that hearing words prompts the visual imagination, because this is not vision in the physical world, but the imaginative one.  How do we know this?  Because it would be impossible to physically see the subtle changes in skin pallor in black air and thick fog.  One may close one's eyes in meditation to the outward world, but not one's ears, and so, in the absence of physical sight, Virgil depends on listening, as the reader should too, because listening to the text is the physical sensory act which enables us to see what the poet is telling us, and to enter with an imaginative body the imaginative landscape of the work.  When we "see" Virgil cock his head to listen, we, the readers, should follow suit, sharpening our attention to the sounds of the words.  The closed eyes, the mastering of emotion and breath, the focused listening, these are elements of an hypnotic induction, and so the poem casts its spell.

7  “Pur a noi converrà vincer la punga,”
8  cominciò el, “se non... Tal ne s'offerse ... 
9  Oh quanto tarda a me ch'altri qui giunga!” 

10  I' vidi ben sì com' ei ricoperse
11  lo cominciar con l'altro che poi venne,
12  che fur parole a le prime diverse;

13  ma nondimen paura il suo dir dienne,
14  perch' io traeva la parola tronca
15  forse a peggior sentenzia che non tenne.

"Still it behoveth us to win the fight,"
Began he; "Else. . . Such offered us herself. . .
O how I long that someone here arrive!"

Well I perceived, as soon as the beginning
He covered up with what came afterward,
That they were words quite different from the first;

But none the less his saying gave me fear,
Because I carried out the broken phrase,
Perhaps to a worse meaning than he had.

After the induction of the first few lines, the protagonist Dante does indeed sharpen his hearing, and he notes that Virgil changes what he is going to say in midstream.  What was he going to say?  Presumably something about Beatrice's promise of Divine protection and Virgil's ordination to be Dante's protector and savior.  Virgil at this impasse has failed at that, and he, a pagan, who may believe in the contract of a human promise, cannot have a spiritual faith that the Divine will supplant his shortcomings with inhuman, spiritual, aid.  If Beatrice's promise has failed, Virgil's promise to her to save Dante, has failed too.  So, we hear a reiteration of the despair that Virgil expressed in line 120 of the previous canto, as he waits without the comfort of faith for divine intervention.  And yet, he makes an effort, a kind of whistling in the dark effort, to calm himself and his ward, by softening what he was going to say, and in the lines that follow, telling himself, and Dante, that he knows his way around down here, because he has been here before.   

16  “In questo fondo de la trista conca
17  discende mai alcun del primo grado,
18  che sol per pena ha la speranza cionca?”

19  Questa question fec' io; e quei “Di rado
20  incontra,” mi rispuose, “che di noi
21  faccia il cammino alcun per qual io vado. 

22  Ver è ch'altra fiata qua giù fui,
23  congiurato da quella Eritón cruda
24  che richiamava l'ombre a' corpi sui.

25  Di poco era di me la carne nuda,
26  ch'ella mi fece intrar dentr' a quel muro,
27  per trarne un spirto del cerchio di Giuda.

28   Quell' è 'l più basso loco e 'l più oscuro,
29  e 'l più lontan dal ciel che tutto gira:
30  ben so 'l cammin; però ti fa sicuro.

31  Questa palude che 'l gran puzzo spira
32  cigne dintorno la città dolente,
33  u' non potemo intrare omai sanz' ira.”

16  "Into this bottom of the doleful conch
17  Doth any e'er descend from the first grade,
18  Which for its pain has only hope cut off?"

19  This question put I; and he answered me:
20  "Seldom it comes to pass that one of us
21  Maketh the journey upon which I go.

22  True is it, once before I here below
23  Was conjured by that pitiless Erictho,
24  Who summoned back the shades unto their bodies.

25  Naked of me short while the flesh had been,
26  Before within that wall she made me enter,
27  To bring a spirit from the circle of Judas;

28  That is the lowest region and the darkest,
29  And farthest from the heaven which circles all.
30  Well know I the way; therefore be reassured.

31  This fen, which a prodigious stench exhales,
32  Encompasses about the city dolent,
33  Where now we cannot enter without anger."

In the last 8 centuries, a sea of scholarly ink has been spilt and buckets of intellectual elbow grease expended to trace the source of this tale by Virgil recounting his previous journey to the depths of hell.  The most probable answer is that Dante put together an original story from a number of sources, but this should interest us less than the why's and wherefore's of the matter.  Why does the text take this little interpolation detour?   Yes, we understand that the aspirant asks the question if anyone from the first circle — Virgil's fixed abode in limbo — has ever descended further into hell than this point.  Here, the two protagonists are now at an impasse,  and the aspirant wants to know if such a thing is even possible.  And in answer to this question, Virgil tells this tale of Erictho, a witch, who had, when Virgil was only newly denuded of his flesh — i.e., become a shade —bewitched him.  He was sent against his will, or by means of stripping him of his will, to fetch a soul from the deepest part of hell.  The question that I think is raised here is that of the  chasm which separates magic from miracle, conjuration from ordination.  In Virgil's first journey into hell, he has been deprived of his will in order to perform a supremely unnatural act: that is, the reanimation of its dead body by a departed soul.  And in this second expedition, Virgil, through a voluntary act of obedience to a higher source of inspiration — that is to say, his ordination as a guide to Dante by Beatrice —  agrees to shepherd a living person through hell for the purpose of that soul's salvation.  It should also be noted that back in line 9, Virgil too wishes to see into the future, which was how Erictho came to be summoned in the first place in the Roman Civil War, and Virgil laments about how long he has been in expectation.   Whatever more contemporary sources that Dante might have used to concoct this story of Virgil acting as the will-less instrument of Erictho, it seems that most of the information about Erichtho herself was gleaned from Lucan, specifically from Book Six of Pharsalia (a.k.a. Civil War).  Here is some of what Lucan says about this witch:

These rites of criminality, these spells of the direful race, 
the wild Erictho has condemned as being of piety too extreme, 
and has applied the polluted art to new ceremonies. 
For to her it is not permitted to place her deadly head within 
a roof or a home in the city; and she haunts the deserted piles, 
and, the ghosts expelled, takes possession of the tombs, 
pleasing to the Gods of Erebus. To hear the counsels of the dead, 
to know the Stygian abodes and the secrets of the concealed Pluto, 
not the Gods above, not a life on earth, forbids. Leanness has possession 
of the features of the hag, foul with filthiness, and, unknown 
to a clear sky, her dreadful visage, laden with uncombed locks, 
is beset with Stygian paleness. If showers and black clouds 
obscure the stars, then does the Thessalian witch stalk forth 
from the spoiled piles, and try to arrest the lightnings of the night. 
The seeds she treads on of the fruitful corn she burns up, 
and by her breathing makes air noxious that was not deadly before. 
She neither prays to the Gods of heaven, nor with suppliant prayer 
calls the Deity to her aid, nor does she know of the propitiating 
entrails; upon the altars she delights to place funereal flames, 
and frankincense which she has carried off from the lighted pile.
Her voice now first heard as she demands, the Gods of heaven 
accede to all the wickedness, and dread to hear a second address. 
Souls that live, and still rule their respective limbs, she buries 
in the tomb; and death reluctantly creeps on upon those who owe 
lengthened years to the Fates; the funeral procession turning back, 
the dead bodies she rescues from the tomb; corpses fly from death. 
The smoking ashes of the young and the burning bones she 
snatches from the midst of the piles, and the very torch which 
the parents have held; the fragments, too, of the funereal bier 
that fly about in the black smoke, and the flowing robes does she 
collect amid the ashes, and the embers that smell of the limbs.
But when corpses are kept within stone, from which the moisture within 
is taken away, and, the corruption withdrawn, the marrow has grown 
hard; then does she greedily raven upon all the limbs, 
and bury her hands in the eyes, and delight to scoop out 
the dried-up balls, and gnaw the pallid nails of the 
shrunken hand; with her mouth she tears asunder the halter 
and the murderous knots; the bodies as they hang she gnaws, 
and scrapes the crosses; the entrails, too, smitten by the showers she 
rends asunder, and the parched marrow, the sun's heat admitted thereto. 
Iron fastened into the hands, and the black corruption of the filthy matter 
that distils upon the limbs, and the slime that has collected, 
she bears off, and hangs to the bodies, as the sinews hold fast her bite.
Whatever carcass, too, is lying upon the bare ground, 
before the beasts and the birds of the air does she sit; nor does she wish 
to separate the joints with iron and with her hands, and about to tear 
the limbs from their parched jaws, she awaits the bites of the wolves. 
Nor do her hands refrain from murder, if she requires the 
life-blood, which is the first to spring from the divided throat. 
Nor does she shun slaughter, if her rites demand living gore, 
and her funereal tables demand the quivering entrails. 
So, through the wounds of the womb, not the way in which nature invites, 
is the embryo torn out, about to be placed upon the glowing altars. 
And as often as she has need of grim and stalwart shades, she herself 
makes the ghosts; every kind of death among mankind is in her employ.
She from the youthful body tears the down of the cheek; 
she with her left hand from the dying stripling cuts off the hair. 
Full often, too, at her kinsman's pile has the dire Thessalian witch 
brooded over the dear limbs, and imprinting kisses, 
has both cut off the head, and torn away the cheeks pressed with her teeth, 
and biting off the end of the tongue as it cleaves to the dried throat, 
has poured forth murmurs into the cold lips, and has 
dispatched accursed secrets to the Stygian shades.

Phew!  This is putrifaction personified, or rather, demonically diefied.  Erictho is the crone of the triple Goddess, she stands guard at the barrier between life and death, and when the spirit which animates the body flees its host, she rots the corpse, and takes its disgusting detritus into her own bodily substance, which is why she looks so terrifying and smells so bad.  

One of the great pleasures of reading Dante, is that of being diverted by the text to other texts: to Saint Augustine, to Aristotle, to Plato, to Ovid, to the Bible — and, here, to Lucan.  So much of Dante's topography of hell, the black air and the noxious landscapes, the city of Dis, the furies, the power of the voice to cast evil spells, the Giants that we find later in hell, the descriptions of the Erinyes/Furies, the sepulchers, and the river Styx, the civil war in heaven, and those on earth, like that of Lucan's Romans and Dante's Florentines ... Dante has extensively mined the details of Lucan and converted them for his own use.  I think Dante read Lucan with the same owl's eye for detail with which we now read Dante, and if the reader of Dante would go back to Lucan, just to follow what the earlier Latin poet has said about the Thessalian witches and about Erictho in particular, a great deal of how Dante thought about this subject, how he imagined it, and how he so perfectly placed this apparent re-assurance by Virgil in Canto IX, would be illuminated.  The correspondences just leap off the pages of the compared texts, and in the case here, Dante the poet, way more savvy than Dante the protagonist, is clearly stating that being a pagan, even so sagacious and honored a pagan as is Virgil, has it's damning limitations, not the least of which is this impious weakness to magic.  Lucan makes this clear.  Even the most powerful Gods of the pagan pantheon are slaves to her voice, her spells, and here a number of parodic contrasts are suggested: Beatrice's imprecations compared to Erictho's spells, Erictho's control of the sublunar terrestrial world, and what Virgil said about Fortuna in Canto  VII, prayer for divine intercession and conjuration to impell elementals.  Dante, the writer, has to thread the needle here, in so far as he must maintain Virgil as a viable guide and source of direction and wisdom, but he cannot ignore the fact that Virgil is a pagan, and, although we will later find Pagans among those to be saved in Purgatory, Virgil does not belong there.  Up to now in the Inferno, there are no passages more than these that at the beginning of Canto IX which spell out Virgil's limitations with the plain and glaring fact that his pagan mind remains tainted by doubt (was Beatrice's promise genuine?), and superstition (he was duped by Erictho to perform an impious act).  We don't want to believe it, but even a great person, a genius, a master of language, a fount of reason, and a treasure trove of wisdom, with the wrong beliefs, with a lack of faith, condemns him or herself to the hopeless suspension of limbo.  Such a person's highest pleasure is only that of the Symposium and never the transcendence of the blessed.

Here again, I think Dante is very concerned not to fall into the Manichean heresy of a God of Goodness who reigns in heaven beyond the evils of physical creation, and the demi-urge who created and rules Earth and all things caught in the warp and woof weavings of space and time.  And in studying Lucan so assiduously he must have also been aware that Civil War was not only the state of things between the Guelphs and the Ghibellines in Florence, but also throughout Italy between the Church and the rival secular powers, or beyond Italy, between the Church and the Albigensian heresies of the Cathars, which raged with genocidal fury throughout Languedoc in the century prior.   All of these external Civil Wars are the result of the war in the  psyche of each individual between faith and reasonable doubt.  Dante, the poet, chooses faith, but not before the effects of reasonable doubt have been thoroughly explored.   Very slyly and very backhandedly in these passages, Dante leads us to the understanding that the psyches, not only of evil doers, but also those of great and good geniuses like Virgil, can fall prey to both their own reason, and also to superstition.  If reason gives you no hope of beatitude, is it not a kind of stubborn superstitious acceptance of reason to reject the mystery of faith?  Pascal thought so, hence his famous wager.  Here too we find that Dante's work remains relevant, and perhaps even more relevant than it was in his own times, because this contest between reasonable doubt and faith still rages in almost all of us, and still is the source of much geopolitical and sectarian violence.  That being the case, Civil War, and its attendant rage, terror, and arrogance is a condition of being in all sublunar, terrestrial, and hell worlds.  Here is the stark presentation of what we have referred to as the metaphor of war, which rules all these lokas, and all their denizens.   This metaphor of existence as an eternal state of war, of suffering and of retribution, even as we have seen before in Canto III, when the Gates of Hell declare the existence of their domain before all created things, is a punishment that pre-exists even the creation of those to be punished.  It is in effect a statement about the power of language and its metaphors to create and control minds, hearts, and worlds.  That all of these arguments rise to a conscious level out of the condition of impasse, the condition of the unbreakable double-bind, and the condition of the seemingly insurmountable barrier leads the reader to confront the greatest barrier of them all: the barrier that mortality erects which blocks the body from entering the domain of the immortals.  This confrontation is emphasized again and again as the shades encounter Dante's mortal body traversing what we might call the imaginative realms of the spirit.  Dante, the poet, has escaped the bounds of nature, through his own poetry, something I believe that no theologian, philosopher, scholar, ethicist, or historian could do.  I think he shows the reader that the primacy of poetry derives from its protean ability to  straddle and unite, in a single aesthetic vision, these otherwise incompatible and always warring worlds.  Below, Dante shows how poetry does this by uniting metaphors for wind, fire, water, and giving them the same essential meaning.

I don't want to leave this section without referring to the existence of the faithful who perversely renounce virtue and all societal rules as a path to divine union.   There are Shiva sadhus of the Aghorï sect who despise all virtue, eat their own shit, live in cremation grounds, practice cannibalism, communicate with obscenities and profanities, and otherwise engage in any act thought by the traditionally pious to be impious, diabolical, and criminal.  There reasoning is that God cannot be excluded from any act, however vile, without creating a split in the Universal being, and that can never be.  In Russia too, there were sectarians, who, believing that Christ, the Shepard who left his flock of 99 sheep to rescue his one lost sheep, was compelled, as part of his divine nature as the Savior, to be the most attentive to the rescue of those who sin the most.  Therefore, every sin must be committed in the most orgiastic manner so that the sinner can move closer to the Savior.  We find like beliefs across the world in shamanic practices, where shamans engage in violent actions, abusive language, crying and howling for no reason, transformations into beasts, trance states, votive sacrifices, and Eucharistic cannibalism to attain supernatural powers.  Religion, as Frazer copiously illustrates in The Golden Bough, is rooted in magic, and magic is often rooted in the violently incomprehensible.  Dante eschews all this, and seeks instead miracle degreed by divine grace, and yet, like Yeats' Magi, he did indeed experience "the controllable mystery on the bestial floor". 

Finally, I want to look at the last line of this section (line 33) wherein Virgil declares that the City of Dis cannot me entered without anger.  Whether he means that anger — in this place where anger is the main affect — only begets anger, or that anger can only be overcome by anger, is not clear.  The fact that it is not clear, and cannot be made clear, goes back to the double-bind nature of the metaphor of war, which in hell reigns supreme, and even determines the actions of those heavenly entities who enter hell for heavenly purposes.  Nowhere in hell are we in a "resist not evil" or "turn the other cheek" mode.  In the place of fighting, be prepared to fight, but don't mistake the place of fighting as something universal.  All the irony and parody that the poem displays would not even be possible if this were true.  There are other places, more inclusive, more fundamental, maybe even more real, which are places of learning or places of blessing, and these places are where the parodist achieves his perspective, where he rises above the fray to expose the futility of it.   
  
34  E altro disse, ma non l'ho a mente;
35  però che l'occhio m'avea tutto tratto
36  ver' l'alta torre a la cima rovente,

37  dove in un punto furon dritte ratto
38  tre furïe infernal di sangue tinte,
39  che membra feminine avieno e atto,

40  e con idre verdissime eran cinte;
41  serpentelli e ceraste avien per crine,
42 onde le fiere tempie erano avvinte.

43  E quei, che ben conobbe le meschine
44  de la regina de l'etterno pianto,
45  “Guarda,” mi disse, “le feroci Erine.

46  Quest' è Megera dal sinistro canto;
47  quella che piange dal destro è Aletto;
48  Tesifón è nel mezzo”; e tacque a tanto.

49  Con l'unghie si fendea ciascuna il petto;
50  battiensi a palme e gridavan sì alto,
51  ch'i' mi strinsi al poeta per sospetto.

52  “Vegna Medusa: sì 'l farem di smalto,”
53  dicevan tutte riguardando in giuso;
54  “mal non vengiammo in Tesëo l'assalto.”
 

55  “Volgiti 'n dietro e tien lo viso chiuso;
56  ché se 'l Gorgón si mostra e tu 'l vedessi,
57  nulla sarebbe di tornar mai suso.”

58  Così disse 'l maestro; ed elli stessi
59  mi volse, e non si tenne a le mie mani,
60  che con le sue ancor non mi chiudessi.

61  O voi ch'avete li 'ntelletti sani,
62  mirate la dottrina che s'asconde
63  sotto 'l velame de li versi strani.

34  And more he said, but not in mind I have it;
35  Because mine eye had altogether drawn me
36  Tow'rds the high tower with the red-flaming summit,

37  Where in a moment saw I swift uprisen
38  The three infernal Furies stained with blood,
39  Who had the limbs of women and their mien,

40  And with the greenest hydras were begirt;
41  Small serpents and cerastes were their tresses,
42  Wherewith their horrid temples were entwined.

43  And he who well the handmaids of the Queen
44  Of everlasting lamentation knew,
45  Said unto me: "Behold the fierce Erinnys.

46  This is Megaera, on the left-hand side;
47  She who is weeping on the right, Alecto;
48  Tisiphone is between;" and then was silent.

49  Each one her breast was rending with her nails;
50  They beat them with their palms, and cried so loud,
51  That I for dread pressed close unto the Poet.

52  "Medusa come, so we to stone will change him!"
53  All shouted looking down; "in evil hour
54  Avenged we not on Theseus his assault!"

55  "Turn thyself round, and keep thine eyes close shut,
56  For if the Gorgon appear, and thou shouldst see it,
57  No more returning upward would there be."

58  Thus said the Master; and he turned me round
59  Himself, and trusted not unto my hands
60  So far as not to blind me with his own.

61  O ye who have undistempered intellects,
62  Observe the doctrine that conceals itself
63  Beneath the veil of the mysterious verses!

One of the things you come to realize in reading Dante is that the operations of consciousness and the operations of language are analogically linked, and as in lines 34 - 35, (And more he said, but not in mind I have it; / Because mine eye had altogether drawn me ... E altro disse, ma non l'ho a mente; / però che l'occhio m'avea tutto tratto ...) when the language shifts, in this case from hearing explanations to seeing descriptions, from listening to vision, the operations of the mind (mente) shift too, here, to the modality of visible fear.  One could say that what we see in the sudden vision of the furies is the underlying terror which Virgil has attempted to conceal behind his reasonable gloss.  This is a poetic process, which Dante, the author, takes time out from the narrative to alert us to in lines 61 - 63, and throughout the poem, we are always peeking beneath the veil of the mysterious verses, only to have thrust upon us the immediacy of a revelation.  But there is danger here too, as Virgil well knows when he covers his protégé’s eyes to prevent him from seeing Medusa and turning to stone.   We know that any kind of reasonable explanation may do much to displace our terror of these primal visions.  It takes a physical act by Virgil to divert the aspirant's attention away from the three Erinyes.  Dante does not fully describe the appearance of either the Erinyes or of Erictho, but his readers would have known that they would have had the same appearance as that of Medusa: snakes for hair, dog's heads, women's bodies charred black as coal or of a slimy swamp-green, bat wings, blood-shot, flaming eyes, taloned hands, and so forth.  So, we can collapse all of these figures down to an archetype of female malevolence, a parody of the three Women who stand for Heaven's care: The Blessed Virgin, Saint Lucy, and Beatrice.  Sometimes, we need to go to outside sources to fully imagine what Dante had fully imagined, so that we can crawl inside his mind and fully experience his world.  Reading Dante is like some slow burn of a psychedelic experience, not concentrated in a few hours of altered consciousness from taking psilocybin or mescaline, but spread out over months or even years.  This long, increasingly transforming tumble into awe reveals itself as a process of discovering the points of contact and diversion between two types of reality — one's everyday life and one's immersion into the poem.  Imagine those anatomical transparencies, where overlaying one sheet atop another changes what one sees, the picture becoming more and more opaque as sheets are added.  And now imagine turning the pages backwards and seeing more and more fundamental layers of the body exposed to your contemplation.  Boundaries, once thought to be inviolable, are seen to be fluid, interpenetrating, and interactive.  And psychedelics, however differently they affect our body/brain chemistry, are always boundary dissolvers.  The consciousness of the reader when reading about the three furies begins to break the normal time-line of past/present/future.  A temporal boundary is shattered, as the reader turns back and connects these threenesses to the three beasts in Canto I, the three-headed monster Cerberus, or, in a diabolic parody, the holy trinity of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and of course a parody as noted above of the Virgin, Saint Lucy, and Beatrice.  How can three things be one, without being a monstrous conglomeration brought about by a dissolution of boundaries?  And we should be reminded here also of where we are in the Commedia: at a boundary separating the hell of the intemperate from the hell of the more criminally malicious.

We are stuck here: and the re-iteration of the tower, which we first encountered at the end of the previous canto, and the furies, entities, not just of wrath, but of retributive wrath, are now seen in the place of the twin flames: a weird two/three image trope, duple or triple meters in the poem that, read one way, and have a certain beat, while the same passage, read with a different emphasis, has another beat — again, boundaries dissolving, the same line becoming two or three different lines depending on the emphasis of the reader's interpretation or mood.  And what about this passage declaiming the threat (which turns out to be empty) of the conjuration of Medusa (a failed attempt at magic), in which Virgil shuts the eyes of the Dante by force, lest he be turned to stone?  Isn't this fear of petrification an unavoidable adjunct to rage?   It is all a reptile brain response.  A frightened lizard makes a threat display, runs a certain distance, freezes, then repeats the whole performance: another three: fight, flight, or freeze, the whole behavioral pattern locked in by an evolutionary dependence on automaticity, which is dependent upon cause and effect reflexivity, and which admits to no variations, even when the threat is death.  Reading Dante seems somehow to thrust one out of this reflexive cycle to become a roamer between different worlds. 

64  E già venìa su per le torbide onde
65  un fracasso d'un suon, pien di spavento,
66  per cui tremavano amendue le sponde

67  non altrimenti fatto che d'un vento
68  impetüoso per li avversi ardori,
69  che fier la selva e sanz' alcun rattento

70  li rami schianta, abbatte e porta fori;
71  dinanzi polveroso va superbo,
72  e fa fuggir le fiere e li pastori.

73  Li occhi mi sciolse e disse: “Or drizza il nerbo
74  del viso su per quella schiuma antica
75  per indi ove quel fummo è più acerbo.”

76  Come le rane innanzi a la nimica
77  biscia per l'acqua si dileguan tutte,
78  fin ch'a la terra ciascuna s'abbica,

79  vid' io più di mille anime distrutte
80  fuggir così dinanzi ad un ch'al passo
81  passava Stige con le piante asciutte.

82  Dal volto rimovea quell' aere grasso,
83  menando la sinistra innanzi spesso;
84  e sol di quell' angoscia parea lasso.

85  Ben m'accorsi ch'elli era da ciel messo,
86  e volsimi al maestro; e quei fé segno
87  ch'i' stessi queto ed inchinassi ad esso.

88  Ahi quanto mi parea pien di disdegno!
89  Venne a la porta e con una verghetta
90  l'aperse, che non v'ebbe alcun ritegno.

91  “O cacciati del ciel, gente dispetta,”
92  cominciò elli in su l'orribil soglia,
93  “ond' esta oltracotanza in voi s'alletta?

94  Perché recalcitrate a quella voglia
95  a cui non puote il fin mai esser mozzo,
96  e che più volte v'ha cresciuta doglia?

97  Che giova ne le fata dar di cozzo?
98  Cerbero vostro, se ben vi ricorda,
99  ne porta ancor pelato il mento e 'l gozzo.”

100  Poi si rivolse per la strada lorda,
101  e non fé motto a noi, ma fé sembiante
102  d'omo cui altra cura stringa e morda

103  che quella di colui che li è davante;
104  e noi movemmo i piedi inver' la terra,
105  sicuri appresso le parole sante.

64  And now there came across the turbid waves
65  The clangour of a sound with terror fraught,
66  Because of which both of the margins trembled;

67  Not otherwise it was than of a wind
68  Impetuous on account of adverse heats,
69  That smites the forest, and, without restraint,

70  The branches rends, beats down, and bears away;
71  Right onward, laden with dust, it goes superb,
72  And puts to flight the wild beasts and the shepherds.

73  Mine eyes he loosed, and said: "Direct the nerve
74  Of vision now along that ancient foam,
75  There yonder where that smoke is most intense."

76  Even as the frogs before the hostile serpent
77  Across the water scatter all abroad,
78  Until each one is huddled in the earth.

79  More than a thousand ruined souls I saw,
80  Thus fleeing from before one who on foot
81  Was passing o'er the Styx with soles unwet.

82  From off his face he fanned that unctuous air,
83  Waving his left hand oft in front of him,
84  And only with that anguish seemed he weary.

85  Well I perceived one sent from Heaven was he,
86  And to the Master turned; and he made sign
87  That I should quiet stand, and bow before him.

88  Ah! how disdainful he appeared to me!
89  He reached the gate, and with a little rod
90  He opened it, for there was no resistance.

91  "O banished out of Heaven, people despised!"
92  Thus he began upon the horrid threshold;
93  "Whence is this arrogance within you couched?

94  Wherefore recalcitrate against that will,
95  From which the end can never be cut off,
96  And which has many times increased your pain?

97  What helpeth it to butt against the fates?
98  Your Cerberus, if you remember well,
99  For that still bears his chin and gullet peeled."

100  Then he returned along the miry road,
101  And spake no word to us, but had the look
102  Of one whom other care constrains and goads

103  Than that of him who in his presence is;
104  And we our feet directed tow'rds the city,
105  After those holy words all confident.


How do you explain metaphors as richly complicated, and as naturally understood as those employed by Dante?  The coming of this heavenly messenger — grace personified — is anything but subtle.  With the tremendous force of a cyclone (wind) caused by diverse zones of heat (fire) this presence scares up the souls in the swamp (water), who flee like frogs from a serpent (note the choice of frogs, amphibians which live in two worlds, here, subaqueous and subterranean).  We also have the reference to the wild beasts and shepherds, which recalls a whole Orphean tradition of poetry, wherein a shepherd has the power to tame wild animals with his songs, and here this whole tradition of pastoral poetry is swept away by this cyclonic gust of epic verse.  Opposites are combined, as noted above, and made to serve a unified purpose in a way that is beyond the technical reach of didactic prose.  So without making a didactic speech at all, Dante shows why poetry, more than sermons, and equal to scripture, possess a power to transform the attentive reader, gathering up the hypersensual into a kind of hyperspace of metaphor, in which one metaphor grows out of another, or dives into another, like so many Russian dolls, which change position from external descriptions to internal emotional states to overarching metaphysical decrees in the most astonishing protean displays.  These metaphors infiltrate the mind and emotions of the reader in a kind of mutational yeast that transforms the body, and the ordinary act of reading, into a whirl of spiritual experiences and their attendant insights.  These few passage represent a poetic miracle — including the disdain shown by the heavenly messenger that absolutely mirrors the miracle described in the narrative.  With a little rod (a quill pen, a writing instrument, or the tongue of the reciter), and a little speech, after walking on water, the messenger opens the gate to Dis, and returns from whence he had come, already having forgotten his stupendous accomplishment, and occupied mentally with his next task.  As readers, we are witness to something in these passages, and the operation of these words in the brain, just like that little rod and little speech of the messenger.  Reading, we open up vast areas of exploration in the unconscious mind.  Certainly we will discover horrible things in this great depository of personal and species history.  But we may also discover, as the dazzling nature of the poetry even when describing odious things so miraculously illustrates:the path to our salvation — and we our feet directed towards the city / after those holy words all confident — e noi movemmo i piedi inver' la terra, / sicuri appresso le parole sante.
 
106  Dentro li 'ntrammo sanz' alcuna guerra;
107  e io, ch'avea di riguardar disio
108  la condizion che tal fortezza serra,

109  com' io fui dentro, l'occhio intorno invio:
110  e veggio ad ogne man grande campagna,
111  piena di duolo e di tormento rio.

112  Sì come ad Arli, ove Rodano stagna,
113  sì com' a Pola, presso del Carnaro
114  ch'Italia chiude e suoi termini bagna,

115  fanno i sepulcri tutt'il loco varo,
116  così facevan quivi d'ogne parte,
117  salvo che 'l modo v'era più amaro;

118  ché tra li avelli fiamme erano sparte,
119  per le quali eran sì del tutto accesi,
120  che ferro più non chiede verun' arte.

121  Tutti li lor coperchi eran sospesi,
122  e fuor n'uscivan sì duri lamenti,
123  che ben parean di miseri e d'offesi.

124  E io: “Maestro, quai son quelle genti
125  che, seppellite dentro da quell' arche,
126  si fan sentir coi sospiri dolenti?”

127  E quelli a me: “Qui son li eresïarche
128  con lor seguaci, d'ogne setta, e molto
129  più che non credi son le tombe carche.

130  Simile qui con simile è sepolto,
131  e i monimenti son più e men caldi.”
132  E poi ch'a la man destra si fu vòlto,

133  passammo tra i martìri e li alti spaldi.

106  Within we entered without any contest;
107  And I, who inclination had to see
108  What the condition such a fortress holds,

109  Soon as I was within, cast round mine eye,
110  And see on every hand an ample plain,
111 Full of distress and torment terrible.

112  Even as at Arles, where stagnant grows the Rhone,
113  Even as at Pola near to the Quarnaro,
114  That shuts in Italy and bathes its borders,

115  The sepulchres make all the place uneven;
116  So likewise did they there on every side,
117  Saving that there the manner was more bitter;

118  For flames between the sepulchres were scattered,
119  By which they so intensely heated were,
120  That iron more so asks not any art.

121  All of their coverings uplifted were,
122  And from them issued forth such dire laments,
123  Sooth seemed they of the wretched and tormented.

124  And I: "My Master, what are all those people
125  Who, having sepulture within those tombs,
126  Make themselves audible by doleful sighs?"

127  And he to me: "Here are the Heresiarchs,
128  With their disciples of all sects, and much
129  More than thou thinkest laden are the tombs.

130  Here like together with its like is buried;
131  And more and less the monuments are heated."
132  And when he to the right had turned, we passed

133  Between the torments and high parapets.

In and out, through and through, up and down, round and round — these morphological components  of the text are all on display in these last lines of Canto IX.  The protagonists enter the City of Dis, now without opposition, and what they see, as the text shows, in phrases that emphasize the circular motion of the scanning eyes, is a vast plain of sepulchers, interspersed by the spindly towers of the minarets and spurts of flame.  Here, moving the attention of the reader around, the text draws the attention to surface geography describing the swampland in certain Italian locales, where the spongy, watery ground forbids ordinary internment, and the dead are placed in above ground, or mostly above ground. sepulchers.  Readers who have visited cemeteries in New Orleans or Galveston will have clear picture of this ghastly scene.  These are people whose heresy was probably, among others, a strictly material view of the body.  They did not believe in an extra-corporeal, post-mortem existence, and they find themselves in their graves, but still living as entities composed entirely of that tormented state wherein the reality of one's situation completely negates the belief system in which one has fixed one's identity.  Disbelievers when alive, they find themselves in an unbelievable condition after death.  The canto ends with another up / down metaphor from the tormented souls in the sepulchers to the high parapets of the city's walls and towers, and this symmetrically closes what was opened with the metaphor of walking on foot towards the high tower with its enigmatic signal flames — a trope that began the previous Canto revealing the protagonists' first shadowy perceptions of the City of Dis.  

Canto X
1  Ora sen va per un secreto calle,
2  tra 'l muro de la terra e li martìri,
3  lo mio maestro, e io dopo le spalle.

4  “O virtù somma, che per li empi giri
5  mi volvi,” cominciai, “com' a te piace,
6  parlami, e sodisfammi a' miei disiri.

1  Now onward goes, along a narrow path
2  Between the torments and the city wall,
3  My Master, and I follow at his back.

4  "O power supreme, that through these impious circles
5  Turnest me," I began, "as pleases thee,
6  Speak to me, and my longings satisfy;

Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is the way,
that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat ... Mathew 7:13.

Is there a lesson in these first 6 lines of Canto X about reading, about learning, about following the path of a spiritual discipline?  As Churchill said: "When you're going through Hell, keep going," which is what the protagonists are doing here, following a virtuous path through the wide, gaping maw of Hell.  I think the narrow gate is something like following a disciplined path as opposed to just going along with the group's consensus thoughts, beliefs, and behaviors, or even our own inclinations to find comfort in following what's easiest.  There is also a general meaning to a text, as there is a general meaning to a dream, but only when we begin thinking inside the text, assuming that these imaginal characters have a real internal life that interfaces with our own life, will the text begin to offer us specific genuine guidance and inspiration.  Why are the protagonist exploring Hell, what is our need, our genuine need, to explore suffering and malfeasance?  And also, why does the protagonist, Dante, reiterate his veneration for Virgil in such glowing and reverential terms (O virtù somma — O power supreme) right after Virgil's first absolute failure?  After reason has failed, how can we still so trust reason?  If we learn something, with much effort, what do we do with that learning and effort, when what we learned turns out to be false or irrelevant?  Is the aspirant here trying to reassure himself or his teacher?  Any process that is a discipline is not steady, but has pitfalls and reversals, and there is nothing so unsteady as interpreting a text so that it provides spiritual guidance without become a set of dictatorial rules.   We are stopped by so many things, by our own fatigue, by hopelessness, by fear, by sickness, by the demands of ordinary life, by the ordinary pleasures of eating, drinking, sex, by boredom, by a feeling that what we are learning is irrelevant, or already known and understood, by a feeling that we are inadequate to complete such an important task, and so forth and so on ad infinitum.  But here, in these 6 lines, just as the aspirant is entering the most dangerous depths of Hell, he keeps following Virgil, keeps going, although he is still turning round and round in dreadful circles.  I think that after the grand impasse of Canto IX, everything becomes more somber, because we realize that even our best efforts have a limit: Failure is an option, and even an overwhelming probability.  How do we keep going when the going only promises more disappointment, more horror, more of the wretchedness of our own limitations?  And why would we want to? 

7  La gente che per li sepolcri giace
8  potrebbesi veder? già son levati
9  tutt' i coperchi, e nessun guardia face.”

7  The people who are lying in these tombs,
8  Might they be seen? already are uplifted
9  The covers all, and no one keepeth guard."

The words that come to mind here are: He is risen.  When the tomb of Jesus was found open, an Angel guarded the entrance, here there are no guards, and the bodies of the dead lie elsewhere while their undecaying shades suffer eternally from their misapprehension of who they are as souls.  The parody here goes with the pattern of parodies which we have seen elsehere: in Hell the patterns of sacremental blessedness are perverted to engines of pain.
But let's ask ourselves, what is the essence of the aspirant's question?  He sees sarcophagi with the lids open, but no bodies as yet.  And if we remember the reference to Erictho in the previous canto, who hexed Virgil to visit the realm of the damned to retrieve a shade so that the witch might reunite it with its corporeal body, then Dante's question here still has to do with magic, and what exactly the powers of Virgil might be.  We will see in Virgil's answer that he references the last judgement, as a way of telling Dante that these are shades without bodies, and that those who lie here as yet unseen are subject only to God's law.  It is a small moment, but telling, because the closeness of Virgil and Dante has been challenged by Virgil's failure in Canto IX, and both parties seem to be wanting to repair any damage caused by doubt and move closer to one another.  Political divisiveness is one of the major topics in this canto, so the text offers a contrast here of two — one pagan, one Christian, one dead, one living, one experienced, one inexperienced — who, despite their differences, are seeking ways to become more intimate.  If we, the readers, take this to be parts inside ourselves, which represent divergent and even conflicting points of view, in our interior drama of the theme of internicine war, Dante, the poet, is here giving us an example of how that split could be healed, and made protecting and productive.

10  E quelli a me: “Tutti saran serrati
11  quando di Iosafàt qui torneranno
12  coi corpi che là sù hanno lasciati.

13  Suo cimitero da questa parte hanno
14  con Epicuro tutti suoi seguaci,
15  che l'anima col corpo morta fanno.

16  Però a la dimanda che mi faci
17  quinc' entro satisfatto sarà tosto,
18  e al disio ancor che tu mi taci.”

19  E io: “Buon duca, non tegno riposto
20  a te mio cuor se non per dicer poco,
21  e tu m'hai non pur mo a ciò disposto.”

10  And he to me: "They all will be closed up
11  When from Jehoshaphat they shall return
12  Here with the bodies they have left above.

13  Their cemetery have upon this side
14  With Epicurus all his followers,
15  Who with the body mortal make the soul;

16  But in the question thou dost put to me,
17  Within here shalt thou soon be satisfied,
18  And likewise in the wish thou keepest silent."

19  And I: "Good Leader, I but keep concealed
20  From thee my heart, that I may speak the less,
22  Nor only now hast thou thereto disposed me."

We live in a post-Darwinian, post-Freudian state of consciousness, in which the question of the soul is either irrelevant or tied irrevocably to biological processes.  We are all Epicureans in that sense, psyche, or mind, for us is a mere epiphenomenon of the brain.  Kill the brain, the soul dies too.  This belief is anathema to any 14th Century Christian, and should be to us as well. Even supposing the soul is only a biologically generated fiction, still, a belief in the soul's immortality, and it's primacy as the generator of the body itself, and not it's product, saves us from the second, unexpressed part of Epicureanism, which is: if the body does not serve the soul, then it only serves itself, and we become mere pleasure-seeking, pain-avoidance machines, and our morality can only logically be the self-centered demands of the flesh.  Can we lie? can we cheat? can we steal or murder? — of course, if the body demands it.  But if the soul is primary, then what we do with our bodies impacts the life of the soul, and the lives of the bodies and souls of others too.  This is not the forum wherein to discuss things like Rupert Sheldrake's morphic resonance, but ecologists studying eco-systems, biologists studying immune systems, sociologists studying war, economists studying fiduciary systems, psychologists studying relationship dynamics all must come to the conclusion that the idea of a network of relationships is something quite different from a network of physical bodies.  The body may die, but relationship does not, as any person grieving for a passed loved one can tell us.  

Given these circumstances: the question that dominates our lives, shapes our relationships, and determines our morality must deal with this interconnection of body and soul, hardware and software.  The Christian answer to this is very much tied up with time and history.  If time is only a mechanism for turning living bodies into decaying corpses, than history is only a means of piling up more corpses.  But if there is a last judgement, when body and soul are finally harmoniously married, then it is a time when time, and it's dreadful henchman, history, both cease to exist and the question of the mixing of mortal and immortal becomes moot.  The open tombs indicate that for those who believe only in mortality, the imagination which posits immortality is telling them that life and death both have the unfinished business of the soul to attend to.  There are still unanswered questions that keep opening up cans of worms, imaginations, and sarcophagi.     

22  “O Tosco che per la città del foco
23  vivo ten vai così parlando onesto,
24  piacciati di restare in questo loco.

25  La tua loquela ti fa manifesto
26  di quella nobil patrïa natio,
27  a la qual forse fui troppo molesto.”

28  Subitamente questo suono uscìo
29  d'una de l'arche; però m'accostai,
30  temendo, un poco più al duca mio.

31  Ed el mi disse: “Volgiti! Che fai?
32  Vedi là Farinata che s'è dritto:
33  da la cintola in sù tutto 'l vedrai.”

34  Io avea già il mio viso nel suo fitto;
35  ed el s'ergea col petto e con la fronte
36  com' avesse l'inferno a gran dispitto.

37  E l'animose man del duca e pronte
38  mi pinser tra le sepulture a lui,
39  dicendo: “Le parole tue sien conte.”

40  Com' io al piè de la sua tomba fui,
41  guardommi un poco, e poi, quasi sdegnoso,
42  mi dimandò: “Chi fuor li maggior tui?”

43  Io ch'era d'ubidir disideroso,
44  non gliel celai, ma tutto gliel' apersi;
45  ond' ei levò le ciglia un poco in suso;

46  poi disse: “Fieramente furo avversi
47  a me e a miei primi e a mia parte,
48  sì che per due fïate li dispersi.”

49  “S'ei fur cacciati, ei tornar d'ogne parte,”
50  rispuos' io lui, “l'una e l'altra fïata;
51  ma i vostri non appreser ben quell' arte.”

22  "O Tuscan, thou who through the city of fire
23  Goest alive, thus speaking modestly,
24  Be pleased to stay thy footsteps in this place.

25  Thy mode of speaking makes thee manifest
26  A native of that noble fatherland,
27  To which perhaps I too molestful was."

28  Upon a sudden issued forth this sound
29  From out one of the tombs; wherefore I pressed,
30  Fearing, a little nearer to my Leader.

31  And unto me he said: "Turn thee; what dost thou?
32  Behold there Farinata who has risen;
33  From the waist upwards wholly shalt thou see him."

34  I had already fixed mine eyes on his,
35  And he uprose erect with breast and front
36  E'en as if Hell he had in great despite.

37  And with courageous hands and prompt my Leader
38  Thrust me between the sepulchres towards him,
39  Exclaiming, "Let thy words explicit be."

40  As soon as I was at the foot of his tomb
41  Somewhat he eyed me, and, as if disdainful,
42  Then asked of me, "Who were thine ancestors?"

43  I, who desirous of obeying was,
44  Concealed it not, but all revealed to him;
45  Whereat he raised his brows a little upward.

46  Then said he: "Fiercely adverse have they been
47   To me, and to my fathers, and my party;
48  So that two several times I scattered them."

49  "If they were banished, they returned on all sides,"
50  I answered him, "the first time and the second;
51  But yours have not acquired that art aright."

The meaning of a text changes according to the perception of the person reading it.  This passage is the beginning of the first part of the dialogue between Dante, the aspirant, and this shade who rises half-way, and is seen from the waist up only, as we learn, his chest puffed out, his brow thrust forward.  Whoever this is he is appealing to Dante in a way most likely to arrest Dante's attention: He praises Dante's language, which binds the two together.  But we shall shortly see, how that very language becomes an instrument of divisiveness.  The aspirant pulls closer to Virgil, the Latin master of language, and Virgil turns him around and pushes him towards the figure who rises out of the sarcophagus.  Again we see the circling, turning, spiraling morphology that is characteristic of the whole poem, but here we see this turning needing to be straightened out, Dante's fearful act of running under Virgil's skirt, cannot be tolerated.  Whoever this shade is, he is not someone whom Dante can ignore.  Dante, again having to travel the straight and narrow between the sepulchers, and step forward to face this fearful, orgulous figure.  Virgil's injunction: Look: this is/was a great and powerful nemesis to you, your party, your family, your honor, step forward, and mind that your speech — note that speech — "let your words count" (line 39: Le parole tue sien conte), or another way to translate this, "your words are counted," somewhat like the feathers of that sparrow in the gospels.  No one ever counted words or made words count more than Dante, and here he is instructing us to weigh these words that we are reading, because the truth is in them, not merely in their obvious meaning as signs pointing to an external reality, but as the promulgators of history, aesthetics, morality, immortality, and the conduits to salvation.  In these lines, it looks as if there is a discussion of Florentine history which is being discussed, and it is, but only on the surface, that is the half of the body that is visible.  But the other, buried half, is about art, and about creating a reality which is not the political or economic external, which history foists upon us as a fate, but about something that is neither external nor internal, objective nor subjective, but transcendent.  The essential nature of this deeper part of reality is beginning to sink in, both for the neophyte aspirant Dante, who is a protagonist in the poem, but also for the reader, who has all along been drawn down through a process of language, of poetry, wherein the historical and theological are transformed into metaphors which have the power to alter our state of consciousness, from trapped by fate and fearful, to a place where freedom expands joyously in every conceivable direction.  Here, though, history must be faced.  Farinata, the historical person, must be faced, as also Dante, the historical person, must be.  Certainly the Italians, and especially the Florentines of the 14th century would not have needed a footnote to know about the political schisms of the Guelfs and Ghibellines, the Blacks and Whites, and the part that Farinata and Dante's persons and families played on this historical stage.  Farinata is still literally mired in a conflict which can have no meaning for him now that he is dead, just as those historical conflicts can have no meaning for us — all these centuries later.  And yet, Dante's and Farinata's conflict is emblematic of a kind of violent factionalism that every historical period up to now has suffered, and will continue to suffer, until time and history end in that unimaginable entelechy that Terrace McKenna postulates as the changelessness which will finally fulfill all the desires sought but not found in change.  This poem is a step by step, word by word, procedure guiding us from mutable mortality to immutable immortality, a transformation which can never be found in history, but only in art.  That's a bold statement, but there is some justification for it because the cave paintings at Lascaux, the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel, the plays of Shakespeare, and the Divina Commedia have all been born in mutable time, and all have become portals into immutable timelessness.  In brief, the moment that a text like this transforms its political and theological conflicts into art — language, and the language of art — the text changes, and it changes in the direction of a timeless place of consciousness, which will give us a full recognition — not just from the waist up — of historical reality in its role as transformational agent.  That is to say, in its role as the parodic mutable image of eternity.  Farinata's political argument here is not about Florentine politics at all.   Farinata by making his soul still attend only to temporal things has converted eternity into an interminable squabble over historical clots of dust.  The text demands that we examine that dust as an aesthetic experience not as a conflict that time will make meaningless.  This redeems the dust in the same way that God's fashioning of Adam (a name that means dust or red clay) redeemed it.  The deeper we go into Dante's Hell, or our own, the more profound our insights must be to see through history's smoke, fire, and stench to timeless blessedness.

Imagine the following footnote explaining Farinato's historical existence with the names and places changed to those with historical meaning for you, the reader, and then the dialog leaps out of one historical circumstance to another, and then, too, the underlying aesthetic and moral meaning of the text can do the same kind of work for any current reader as it did for Dante's contemporaries.  By this method of learning about Dante's history, we not only learn something about our own, but we learn about the impact of historicity itself, and why the Epicurean position cuts us off from the deepest and most fundamental levels of our existence.  Historically each moment is wiped out by the succeeding one, and the Epicurean, seeing this, says: Seize the moment before it's gone.  Yet where has it gone?  Into the psyche, the soul, the individual and collective mind.  The historical moment dies into an irrelevant and irrevocably destroyed past, but historicity has not died at all, and it has indeed survived as a kind of pattern that still lives to determine the next moment of history.  Without seeing the immortal pattern (Blake's Bright statues in the Halls of Los(s)), we are doomed to repeat it.  Even after the death of the moment and even after the body's death — the pattern remains impregnable.  Thus Epicurean belief chains us to the primacy of the moment, even after the moment has passed, and the sin and sorrow of it is that though we are devoted to the pleasures of the moment, that very abbreviated attention turns the past into the stinking sewage of a chronically infected error in regards to the total movements of time — that is to say, that by seeking to arrest the burgeoning fountain of events and extract some drop for our personal pleasure and as a domain of existence that we can control, the living water becomes dust in our mouths, and everything that we say or do is like the recycling of dung as food.  The immortal spiritual and aesthetic banquet, the joy ever-new, as Paramahansa Yogananda calls it, is turned to skeletons attempting to reflesh their bones by cannibalizing their own past squalor.  In short: a constant enslavement to one's reputation, which is what all these damned souls are trying to restore in their self-serving interactions with a living person.

As to the history of Farinata, the following commentary will be enough for the contemporary reader to see what's at stake: 

The speaker is Farinata degli Uberti: 'Manente, called Farinata, son of Jacopo degli Uberti, the “Saviour of Florence,” was born in Florence at the beginning of Century xiii; while still a boy he witnessed the introduction into the city of the Guelf and Ghibelline factions, of the latter of which his family became the leaders; in 1239 be became the head of his house, and in 1248 he took a prominent part in the expulsion of the Guelfs, who however returned in 1251, and a few years later (in 1258) expelled the Ghibellines in their turn, Farinata among them; the latter, who was now acknowledged head of his party, took refuge with the rest of the Ghibelline exiles in Siena, where he organized the measures which led to the crushing defeat of the Florentine Guelfs and their allies at Montaperti, and left the Ghibellines masters of Tuscany (Sept. 4, 1260). After their victory the Ghibellines held a council at Empoli, about twenty miles from Florence, at which it was proposed, in order to put an end once for all to the power of the Florentines, that the city of Florence should be razed to the ground. To this proposal, which was generally approved, Farinata offered the most determined opposition, declaring that he would defend his native city with his own sword as long as he had breath in his body, even though he should have to do it single-handed. In consequence of this protest the proposal was abandoned and Florence was saved from destruction. The Florentines subsequently showed little gratitude to Farinata for his patriotic intervention, for they always expressly included the Uberti with the other Ghibelline families who were excepted from the terms offered to the other exiles. After Montaperti Farinata returned to Florence, where he died in or about 1264, the year before Dante's birth' (cited from Toynbee, “Farinata,” in his Concise Dante Dictionary [Oxford: Clarendon, 1914 (1898)]). For bibliography on his significance to Dante see Anthony K. Cassell (Dante's Fearful Art of Justice [Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1984]), p. 117.

Robert Hollander

52  Allor surse a la vista scoperchiata
53  un'ombra, lungo questa, infino al mento:
54  credo che s'era in ginocchie levata.

55  Dintorno mi guardò, come talento
56  avesse di veder s'altri era meco;
57  e poi che 'l sospecciar fu tutto spento,

58  piangendo disse: “Se per questo cieco
59  carcere vai per altezza d'ingegno,
60  mio figlio ov' è? e perché non è teco?”

61  E io a lui: “Da me stesso non vegno:
62  olui ch'attende là per qui mi mena,
63  orse cui Guido vostro ebbe a disdegno.”

64  Le sue parole e 'l modo de la pena
65  m'avean di costui già letto il nome;
66  però fu la risposta così piena.

67  Di sùbito drizzato gridò: “Come?
68  dicesti 'elli ebbe'? non viv' elli ancora?
69  non fiere li occhi suoi lo dolce lume?”

70  Quando s'accorse d'alcuna dimora
71  ch'io facëa dinanzi a la risposta,
72  supin ricadde e più non parve fora.

52  Then there uprose upon the sight, uncovered
53  Down to the chin, a shadow at his side;
54  I think that he had risen on his knees.

55  Round me he gazed, as if solicitude
56  He had to see if some one else were with me,
57  But after his suspicion was all spent,

58  Weeping, he said to me: "If through this blind
59  Prison thou goest by loftiness of genius,
60  Where is my son? and why is he not with thee?"

61  And I to him: "I come not of myself;
62  He who is waiting yonder leads me here,
63  Whom in disdain perhaps your Guido had."

64  His language and the mode of punishment
65  Already unto me had read his name;
66  On that account my answer was so full.

67  Up starting suddenly, he cried out: "How
68  Saidst thou,—he had? Is he not still alive?
69  Does not the sweet light strike upon his eyes?"

70  When he became aware of some delay,
72  Which I before my answer made, supine
73  He fell again, and forth appeared no more.

THE INTERRUPTION: Now in the middle of the exchange between Dante and Farinata, which is more like a renewal of old political factualism than anything like a debate, an internecine squabble rather a denial even of Epicureanism, in so far as the argument itself, continued after death, is the same argument that we see constantly between dead and living family members inside the heads of the survivors.  Haven't we seen this over and over again in sons and daughters whose parents have died?  They refuse to let them die, and renew the arguments daily as an internal chatter which wipes out any pleasure that might be had in the moment, and casts the survivor into the sarcophagus with the dead?  The dead may indeed cease living in their own bodies, but they then take up residence inside the bodies of the survivors, and the latter become rather like sarcophagi themselves, sarcophagi situated in Hell, alive only in the sense that their continued existence depends upon keeping the conflict alive at the expense of living.

When Cavalcante de ‘Cavalcanti pops up beside Farinata from the same tomb, the two, Cavalcante and Farinata seem not to recognize one another at all.  They are like the same re-run of a television program, shown at the same time, but on different channels, side by side, but on completely different frequencies so that only the watcher is aware of their propinquitous positions, and not they themselves.  Trying to visualize their positions in the same sarcophagus makes one think of those awful old newsreels of the Nazi deathcamps, where the bodies are all jumbled together, their limbs tessellated so that one body is entangled with several others, and yet it is all a mound of corpses, inseparably bound together in history and on film, but unable to really communicate to one another.  This situation should stun us, as readers, and make us weep both for what we have become in relation to the dead, and what we might become when we ourselves have left our mortal bodies.

Cavalcante de ‘Cavalcanti is the father of Dante's best friend, and he clearly expects his son, the poet Guido Cavalcanti, to be beside Dante as he must have, during life, seen the two friends side by side many times.  And yet he does not see his son, and neither does he see Virgil.  And what do we see in the tragic figure of the father who wishes that his son may still be alive, and not subject to the torment of living death, which is the elder Cavalcanti's fate.  We see the tissue of concern for father and son which survives death, but also that same tissue connecting them as doomed Epicureans.   Realizing this, it's easy to see one story as an analogy to the other.   Florence, and Florentines share the same language and home, yet they nevertheless fall into brutal conflict, which ends in exile, death, and nearly the razing of the city itself.  So, internal fracturing and political factioning show us that the city is the macrocosm of the family and the individual.   The city, or if you prefer the nation, or the religion, become, not the abode of one family of fellow citizens, but rather, like the mind of one tortured by conflicting thoughts, a nest of murderers, who in killing one another, do not realize that they are committing suicide.  It is fitting, that this place, being Hell, does not permit Dante to relieve Cavalcanti’s concern that his son is dead and damned as well, and in the stunned pause of seeing his friend's father and trying perhaps to imagine what his own part in these Florentine civil wars has been or might be, the father sinks back in despair, while Dante, self-absorbed, in a very un-Epicurean act, misses the opportunity of the moment, and he finds himself talking again to Farinata, and reviving the old argument about which faction of the city was crueler and deserved the most blame for the bloody strife that was destroying, generation after generation, so many lives of fellow citizens.  Further on, when Dante asks Farinata to inform Cavalcanti that his son still lives (line 109-114 below), the reader, if she or he has been following what has been going on, will have perhaps another pang of anguish at how unlikely it is that Farinata would or could deliver that comforting message.   

73  Ma quell' altro magnanimo, a cui posta
74  restato m'era, non mutò aspetto,
75  né mosse collo, né piegò sua costa;

76  e sé continüando al primo detto,
77    “S'elli han quell' arte,” disse, “male appresa,
78  ciò mi tormenta più che questo letto.

79  Ma non cinquanta volte fia raccesa
80  la faccia de la donna che qui regge,
81  che tu saprai quanto quell' arte pesa.

82  E se tu mai nel dolce mondo regge,
83  dimmi: perché quel popolo è sì empio
84  incontr' a' miei in ciascuna sua legge?”

85  Ond' io a lui: “Lo strazio e 'l grande scempio
86  che fece l'Arbia colorata in rosso,
87  tal orazion fa far nel nostro tempio.”

88  Poi ch'ebbe sospirando il capo mosso,
89  “A ciò non fu' io sol,” disse, “né certo
90  sanza cagion con li altri sarei mosso.

91  Ma fu' io solo, là dove sofferto
92  fu per ciascun di tòrre via Fiorenza,
93  colui che la difesi a viso aperto.”

94  “Deh, se riposi mai vostra semenza,”
95  prega' io lui, “solvetemi quel nodo
96  che qui ha 'nviluppata mia sentenza.

97  El par che voi veggiate, se ben odo,
98  dinanzi quel che 'l tempo seco adduce,
99  e nel presente tenete altro modo.”

100  “Noi veggiam, come quei c'ha mala luce,
101  le cose,” disse, “che ne son lontano;
102  cotanto ancor ne splende il sommo duce.

103  Quando s'appressano o son, tutto è vano
104  nostro intelletto; e s'altri non ci apporta,
105  nulla sapem di vostro stato umano.

106  Però comprender puoi che tutta morta
107  fia nostra conoscenza da quel punto
108  che del futuro fia chiusa la porta.”

109  Allor, come di mia colpa compunto,
110  dissi: “Or direte dunque a quel caduto
111 che 'l suo nato è co' vivi ancor congiunto;

112  e s'i' fui, dianzi, a la risposta muto,
113  fate i saper che 'l fei perché pensava
114  già ne l'error che m'avete soluto.”

73  But the other, magnanimous, at whose desire
74  I had remained, did not his aspect change,
75  Neither his neck he moved, nor bent his side.

76  "And if," continuing his first discourse,
77  "They have that art," he said, "not learned aright,
78  That more tormenteth me, than doth this bed.

79  But fifty times shall not rekindled be
80  The countenance of the Lady who reigns here,
81  Ere thou shalt know how heavy is that art;

82  And as thou wouldst to the sweet world return,
83  Say why that people is so pitiless
84  Against my race in each one of its laws?"

85  Whence I to him: "The slaughter and great carnage
86  Which have with crimson stained the Arbia, cause
87  Such orisons in our temple to be made."

88  After his head he with a sigh had shaken,
89  "There I was not alone," he said, "nor surely
90  Without a cause had with the others moved.

91  But there I was alone, where every one
92  Consented to the laying waste of Florence,
93  He who defended her with open face."

94  "Ah! so hereafter may your seed repose,"
95  I him entreated, "solve for me that knot,
96  Which has entangled my conceptions here.

97  It seems that you can see, if I hear rightly,
98  Beforehand whatsoe'er time brings with it,
99  And in the present have another mode."

100  "We see, like those who have imperfect sight,
101  The things," he said, "that distant are from us;
102  So much still shines on us the Sovereign Ruler.

103  When they draw near, or are, is wholly vain
104  Our intellect, and if none brings it to us,
105  Not anything know we of your human state.

106  Hence thou canst understand, that wholly dead
107  Will be our knowledge from the moment when
108  The portal of the future shall be closed."

109  Then I, as if compunctious for my fault,
110  Said: "Now, then, you will tell that fallen one,
111  That still his son is with the living joined.

112  And if just now, in answering, I was dumb,
113  Tell him I did it because I was thinking
114  Already of the error you have solved me."

What an image: the stiff, unmoving shade of Farinata, who, as though made of stone, simply continues speaking as if Cavalcanti had not interrupted.  It is as though time itself in these realms is divided up according to the consciousness of the person who perceives it.  In this case the time that Cavalcanti spoke to Dante does not seem to have existed for Farinata, nor did Farinata's conversation with Dante seem to exist for Cavalcanti.  Yet later, when asked, Farinata can tell Dante who resides in the sarcophagus with him, so that his perception seems entirely based on his arbitrary point-of-view of the moment.  Farinata exists only as a rather fuzzy amalgamation of beliefs, and he splashes around in that puddle of historical events concerned solely with his faction and his family.  He does not see how his thoughts have a certain transparency about them through which we can see superimposed on, or beneath, his obsessions.  As readers, we can see what the poet shows us: the clearer shapes and patterns of history which Farinata cannot see.  We realize that this superimposition or superinterpolation is in fact a deeper vision of reality than the physical eyes could ever see, but which imagination can see, and seeing, probe.  Language gives us this view, not in its literal and linear expositions, but in it metaphors.  The poem enables us to transcend, with our minds and emotions, the time and space which imprison our bodies and make them mortal.  And strange too that this superimposition of damned post-mortem bodies in the space of the sarcophagus seems also to have this superimposition of time — a thing spoken about by Borges in his story "The Alpha" — which is: the difficulty in expressing in linear language these kinds of simultaneities.  Dante does it by innuendo with the simple phrase "as if" (e sé) in line 76.  There is more argument about exile, and the mutual punishments of the warring factions, and, possibly out of maliciousness, Farinata prophesies Dante's exile, a prophesy that Dante accepts, as we see later when he asks the shade how it is that he can see into the future, but have no conception of the present.  And isn't this an amazing and succinct portrayal of anxiety, i.e., Farinata still retains all his rancor of the past, still obsesses on the wrongs done to him and his family, still makes a defense of his actions in recounting his refusing to allow his allies to destroy Florence, and still uses that obsession, as if following the pattern of a temporal weave, to predict that Dante too will suffer exile.  The damned, like the conglomerated beasts of Minos and Cerberus, seem to be, in consciousness, a conglomerate of past resentments and future premonitions, but with no more experience of the present than a corpse without a soul.  An ironic fate for an Epicurean, not to live in this present that philosophically they have exalted to a doctrine of pleasure without consequences during their lives.  Odd too, as in the case with Ciacco and gluttony in Canto VI, that most of this canto seems not to be about the heresy of Epicureanism at all, but rather the destruction of human beings by the factionalization and fractionalization of civil war and internal conflict.  And yet, Dante, the poet, is always concerned with deeper causes.  He may let his protagonist wallow in partisan vitriol, bemoaning the bloodbath at the Arbia river, and gloating a bit that his allies include in their prayers requests for the destruction of Farinata and his ilk, but as a poet, he is always digging deeper, burrowing into Hell, as if his knowledge about these states of consciousness which produce and perpetuate such agony, might later prove to be stairsteps, not deeper into the dungeon of Hell, but up to the blessings offered in Heaven.  In Hell, his is a kind Jnana Yoga, the Yoga of knowledge, of reason, the persistence to work at those knots that bind the soul to a miserable illusion.  Fundamentally, Farinata is in error, in error about the deeper meanings of the past, and is only darkly — by inner light — luce — perhaps his last remnant of God's grace — aware of the pattern of revenge and retribution as it continues to play out in his version of the future.  But everything he sees is filtered through a kind stiff and stubborn lunacy, and is but vaguely illuminated by the mutable light of the Lady of the Moon.  The moon metaphor here, like all of Dante's, suggest that Farinita's insight is only a parodic reflection of divine light, is only the confusing and fickle mix of darkness and light, as is the face of the moon.  The difference between Farinata's perception and Dante's is that for Farinata this pattern is an inescapable web of fate, but for Dante it is an illusory pattern that can, in this case, with the light of reason, be seen through and transcended.  Dante, the protagonist, is a question asker, a seeker in whatever time and place — and from whoever is the denizen of that time and place — of insight.  From Farinata, who is so deluded about time, so tragically ignorant of the present, he learns a curious thing about time, and that is, that when time's past and future illusions collide in a present blessedness, only the present will exist.  That collision, which destroys time itself is called "Last Judgement."   In the world of the eternally blessed, this last judgement is the final step into a state that can have no possibility of judgement.  This is the direction that Dante, the aspirant, is moving, and of which the petrified Farinata is ignorant.  And even here, Farinata keeps asking the wrong questions, the answers to which, simply mire him deeper in his illusions.  Yet, even in Hell, the poet keeps following this breadcrumb trail to a state of blessedness that is inconceivable in Hell, but which even the damned dimly sense.  In the early Hell cantos, Dante, the aspirant, is caught up in sympathy for the sinner (Francesca, for example), but here, through the sharing of a common language with his disputant, he is beginning to ask about and interpret a more probing kind of intelligence.  Dante, the aspirant, is becoming Dante, the poet.  And we, as readers, need to share in his transformation, so that our reading moves from the surface meaning of the text, to its deeper implications.

115  E già 'l maestro mio mi richiamava;
116  per ch'i' pregai lo spirto più avaccio
117  che mi dicesse chi con lu' istava.

118  Dissemi: “Qui con più di mille giaccio:
119  qua dentro è 'l secondo Federico
120  e 'l Cardinale; e de li altri mi taccio.”

121  Indi s'ascose; e io inver' l'antico
122  poeta volsi i passi, ripensando
123  a quel parlar che mi parea nemico.

124  Elli si mosse; e poi, così andando,
125  mi disse: “Perché se' tu sì smarrito?”
126  E io li sodisfeci al suo dimando.

127  “La mente tua conservi quel ch'udito
128  hai contra te,” mi comandò quel saggio;
129  “e ora attendi qui,” e drizzò 'l dito:

130  “quando sarai dinanzi al dolce raggio
131  di quella il cui bell' occhio tutto vede,
132  da lei saprai di tua vita il vïaggio.”

133  Appresso mosse a man sinistra il piede:
134  lasciammo il muro e gimmo inver' lo mezzo
135  per un sentier ch'a una valle fiede,

136  che 'nfin là sù facea spiacer suo lezzo.

115  And now my Master was recalling me,
116  Wherefore more eagerly I prayed the spirit
117  That he would tell me who was with him there.
118  He said: "With more than a thousand here I lie;
119  Within here is the second Frederick,
120  And the Cardinal, and of the rest I speak not."
121  Thereon he hid himself; and I towards
122  The ancient poet turned my steps, reflecting
123  Upon that saying, which seemed hostile to me.
124  He moved along; and afterward thus going,
125  He said to me, "Why art thou so bewildered?"
126  And I in his inquiry satisfied him.
127  "Let memory preserve what thou hast heard
128  Against thyself," that Sage commanded me,
129  "And now attend here;" and he raised his finger.
130  "When thou shalt be before the radiance sweet
131  Of her whose beauteous eyes all things behold,
132  From her thou'lt know the journey of thy life."
133  Unto the left hand then he turned his feet;
134  We left the wall, and went towards the middle,
135  Along a path that strikes into a valley,

136  Which even up there unpleasant made its stench.

Canto X ends with the aspirant being called back to reason — a reason that is bent on the discovery of soul-truths, and not just historical curiosity.  The aspirant wants to know what other Epicureans lie jumbled in the tomb with Farinata.  And in keeping with the entire text's reticence to spread the fame of the damned by bruiting their fates to the upper world, Farinata names only two of the more than a thousand who share his fate.  Those two are Frederic the second, and a man called the Cardinal — one a secular leader, the other an official of the church — each a partisan of the great factions whose conflicts bred so much hatred, deceit, and murder in Dante's time.  The commentary below from Robert Hollander* will tell the interested reader who these men were in history, but what the reader is challenged to learn by these cautionary examples of the damned is something deeper than historical facts — something like the way in which historicity itself calls us away from our mind's concomitance with the soul, and makes psyche a slave to physis, a slave to all the ego's mistaken way of sustaining its mortal house by dominating, using, and murdering other living entities.  Virgil tells Dante to mark well what Farinata has told him about his future exile.  Perhaps he is telling Dante to turn away from the little exile of his historical exile, and all the suffering it caused him and his family, and to remember instead, that it is this very historical lesson, which turns him on the path that will lead to his fulfillment in the gaze of his beloved Beatrice, she, so unlike Farinata, whose beauteous eyes all things behold (bell' occhio tutto vede), and in whose presence he will learn the purpose of his life.  The little gesture here, of Virgil raising his finger to make his point, is easy to visualize.  It was painted by Raphael two centuries later, as the figure of Plato (Leonardo da Vinci) in his work: The School of Athens.  And of course, Leonardo himself became almost obsessed with this gesture as it evolved to become a sign pointing to the enigma of Heaven.

*  Frederick II (1194-1250), King of Sicily and Naples (1212-50), known in his own day as stupor mundi (the wonder of the world) for his extraordinary verve and accomplishments, presided over one of the most glorious courts in Europe. His political battles with the papacy marked nearly the full extent of his reign (he was the victorious leader of the Sixth Crusade [1228-29], 'won' by treaty, while he was under interdict of excommunication). As exemplary of the Guelph view of him see Salimbene: 'Erat enim epicureus, et ideo quidquid poterat invenire in divina scriptura per se et per sapientes suos quod faceret ad ostendendum quod non esset alia vita post mortem, totum inveniebat' (For he was an Epicurean, and as a result whatever he could find in holy scripture itself, or from those who knew the scripture, that would help demonstrate that there were no life after death, he totally set himself to finding – Cronica). 
Cardinal Ottaviano degli Ubaldini, member of a powerful Tuscan Ghibelline family, known to his contemporaries as “the Cardinal” par excellence, was brother of Ubaldino della Pila (Purg. XXIV.29) and uncle of the Archbishop Ruggieri (Inf. XXXIII.14); he was made Bishop of Bologna in 1240, when he was under thirty, by special dispensation of Pope Gregory IX, and in 1244 he was created Cardinal by Innocent IV at the Council of Lyons; he was papal legate in Lombardy, and died in 1272. [He] was suspected of favouring the imperial party, and is credited with a saying: “If I have a soul, I have lost it a thousand times for the Ghibellines”' (the remark is cited by nearly every fourteenth-century commentator found in the DDP). The passage is cited from Paget Toynbee, Concise Dante Dictionary (Oxford: Clarendon, 1914 [1898]), “Cardinale, Il.” 

At the beginning of the journey, the two protagonists turn right, passing along a narrow path between the city's wall and the tombs of the tormented.  If they are going right, the wall must be on their right, and the tombs on their left — the left symbolizing the direction of torment, of error.  The fact that here at the end of the canto, they turn left again, indicates that they are passed these torments of the Epicureans, which seems a kind of high marshy plateau situated against the laws of nature wherein marshes are generally on low ground, a geographic perversion just as the uncovered sepulchers wherein the dead were entombed above ground was a perversion of burial rites of burying the dead below ground.  The protagonists stand on an eminence — turning left in an Aristotelian move to middle ground, the fumes of the deeper levels of Hell rising up as a stench.   Is this the stench of the undead, their bodies disappeared by the noisome process of putrefaction, and the putrefaction alone remaining?  Now these bodies are not the products of cellular activity, but mental reactivity.  A living man, as out of place as a zombie would be in world of sunlight which sustains physical bodies, has entered the realm of MIND, a world of secondary selves, the image of whose forms are not generated by biological processes, but by a certain affect — lust, gluttony, rage, a sense of injustice, a sense of entitlement, a need for retribution, and so forth.  Every person alive has such affects, but not every person ignores all the facts of physical and metaphysical possibilities — our needs, our dependence on the entire panoply of the living for our own lives — to indulge in one affect at the expense of all the others, to indulge in an affect to the detriment of the very body and bodies which sustain it.  If it is the responsibility of mind to care for and love the living, it is the fate of the damned that they betray the mind's or the soul's true responsibilities.  They do not take care of life, instead they only cultivate one parasitical emotion that destroys life, and dooms them to an afterlife of perpetual torment and decay.

Canto XI
There is a thoroughness in this step by step progression of contemplating the Commedia, which allows us to see how every detail of the text enriches and creates an overall pattern.  But we miss, by this method, seeing certain elements of the work which might be described as its accumulative overall effect on our own mind, or as Dante usually refers to it, our soul.  So before we start on the actual text of Canto XI, let's allow our minds to explore some of those accumulating overall effects.  If evolution shows the potential of Life to proliferate, to enrich, and to create innumerable niches for its activities and expressions, then Dante's text, shows how Mind can also proliferate into the realm of Death, creating innumerable niches for its activities and expressions.  Life has no judgements, and therefore no justice, but Death shows us that the mind's potential for expression can rectify that horror, and supply the punishments, lessons, and rewards that Life — Life in its Darwinian evolutionary processes — does not, and cannot have.  In this way, Death augments and completes Life, and provides a ground for justice, guidance, and grace.  What is wrong with Epicureanism and the heresy that Photinus represents in this Canto, namely, that Christ was wholly human, because no Divine personage could emerge between a piss hole and a shit hole from a corruptible human uterus, is that they deprive the mind of the potential to create any justice, guidance, or grace to supersede the temporality and suffering of Life.  Blake said: "God is everywhere, even in the depths of Hell,"   but substitute the word mind, for God, and we show that there is a power in mind, often called the imagination, that can break through the evolutionary process of survival of the fittest, wherein suffering is as pervasive as it is meaningless, and time is nothing more than the operation of chance as surely destroying as it creates its accidental progeny.  Mind, through imagination's power, can break through to a realm of transcendent potential: that is to say, the potential of imagination to create an atemporal realm wherein Divine justice and mercy cannot only exist, but can lend their potential for creativity to human life, and demand for Mind a cosmic kingdom to supplant the chaos of dissolution which awaits all mortal things at the threshold of Death.  Mind, Imagination, God, Soul, Potential — whatever you want to call this mysterious IT, IT can and does create Worlds not subject to the depredations of mere chance.  This is why in Canto VII (note the cryptological significance of the number 7) chance is changed to Lady Fortune.   She is Divinely appointed to reign over temporal life, as a wheel in which everyone eventually is subject to the same vicissitudes.  Life exists on this wheel and as this wheel, and the wheel turns from birth to death though all the randomly occurring degrees of pleasure and suffering.  But Death, more alive than all the living, is Mind's potential for creating and exploring that which omits chance from its geometric constants.  Death, as Dante shows again and again in the sublime structure of the Commedia, enriches life by giving it a place to transcend its own limitations and helplessness.  The punishments of those in Hell, the lessons of those in Purgatory, and the glory of those in Paradise are all aspects of the Mind's supreme power to expand IT's potential, and to colonize with imaginative entities a world beyond the meaningless machinations of Time.

When we meditate, contemplate, study, scientifically investigate, artistically create, read, listen, teach, speak, we are exploring the potentials of Mind, and expanding the potentials of the Divine to the very idea of the Divine.  To say that we cannot do this, is also a potential of the Mind.  The heresies of the Epicureans and the Photians, or of Marxist materialists, is that they deny the Mind access to its most fertile field of potentiality, and throw everything back into the meaningless domain of chance and temporality.  The more astringent their efforts to enforce this limitation, the more, in Dante's imagination, they condemn themselves, in the body or as a shade, to interminable suffering.

Sense of smell: resisting symbolization.  Freud's quote from the Interpretation of Dreams, quotes from the Smell Culture, replacing smell with hearing and seeing,  organizing the stench of sin, which removes the chaotic, omnidirectional nature of scent by human rationality not animal (bestial) sniffing — why the epithet "dog" is an insult.

I have had a harder time coming to grips with Canto XI than with any canto encounter thus far in the inferno.  I think the protagonist — and the committed reader — are in the greatest danger they have been in since the very first canto.  We have survived the impasse of Canto X, and in a sense, we are starting over with the number 1 again.  Having been shaken to our core by the impasse from the previous canto, now we are at a height overlooking the deepest abyss of Hell, and the stench exuded by that abyss presents to us another impasse, this time not fomented by the demons which guarded the Gate of Dis, but by our own senses.  The smell represents a repulsive sensory overload, which is more daunting, because it is inside us as a sensory perception, which has become a kind of autoimmune disease: our own defense mechanism, no longer just serving as a warning, buy actually attacking us, and preventing us from proceeding on our spiritual quest.  What to do?  Virgil's solution is emblematic of the entire thrust of Christianity's strategy to overcome the sense-based superstitious world of Paganism, with a rational moral order, held in place by the miracles of divine grace.  This strategy is spelled out by Virgil in lines 10 - 12:

10  “Lo nostro scender conviene esser tardo,
11  sì che s'ausi un poco in prima il senso
12  al tristo fiato; e poi no i fia riguardo.”

10  "Slow it behoveth our descent to be,
11  So that the sense be first a little used
12  To the sad blast, and then we shall not heed it."

The protagonists draw behind a tomb to escape the blast, and here begins a rather Freudian exercise of displacement.  Namely, we begin to shift psychic or neuronal activity from smell to a story, the elements of which are abstract and a-sensory — a retreat, as we may call it, from sense to argument.  A hint of how the psyche accomplishes this displacement is given in Freud's Interpretation of Dreams:

The dream-thoughts are immediately comprehensible, as soon as we have learnt them.  The dream-content, on the other hand, is expressed as it were in a pictographic script, the characters of which have to be transposed individually into the language of the dream-thoughts.  If we attempted to read these characters according to their pictorial value instead of according to their symbolic relation, we should clearly be led into error:  Suppose I have a picture-puzzle, a rebus, i front of me.  It depicts a house with a boat on its roof, a single letter of the alphabet, the figure of a running man whose head has been conjured away, and so on.  Now I might be misled into raising objections and declaring the picture as a whole and its component parts are nonsensical.  A boat has no business to be on the roof of a house, and a headless man cannot run.  Moreover, the man is bigger than the house, and if the whole picture is intended to represent a landscape, letters of the alphabet are out of place in it since such objects do not occur in Nature.  But obviously we can only form a proper judgement of the rebus if we put aside criticisms such as these of the whole composition and its parts and if, instead, we try to replace each separate by a syllable or word that can by presented by that element in some way or other.  The words that are put together in this way are no longer nonsensical but may form a poetical phrase of the greatest beauty and significance.  A dream is a picture-puzzle of this sort and our predecessors in the field of dream-interpretation have made the mistake of treating the rebus as a pictorial composition and as such it has seemed to them nonsensical and worthless.

In Western languages, smells are notoriously un-symbolizable, and if from the above quote about the images in dreams, we change all the image references to smell ones, we get an inkling of what is happening in this canto.  We are displacing the intolerably complex and insupportable stench of sin, stink by stink with a logical, and geographical substitute.

Dante is showing the  power of the Mind (soul) to shift attention away from bodily discomfort (the stench).  As stated, Freud called displacement, but Dante saw this neurological strategy as the power of reason to move from body to soul, an equivalency of moving from ignorance to knowledge.  It is a distancing maneuver, from smell, to sight, as Virgil says in line 20.  If one reads the history of conversion of paganism to Christianity, invariably the evangelical Christian is seen challenging the local pagan to a rational debate, because reason has this power of neurological manipulation.  It is also the power for foreknowledge, which Virgil uses, as he tells the aspirant in detail, what he can expect to see as they descend deeper into Hell.

Do you remember when Virgil used the epithet "dog" to insult sinners.  Why is dog an insult?  Because they are guided by smell, the most bestial
of the senses, and "insane bestiality" is the third of Virgil's trinity of sins, the other two being incontinence and malice (incontenenza, malizia e la matta /Bestialitade).

Some internet sources on the sense of smell:

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6015838/
link on smell in comparing Dutch and Jahai linguistic groups.

https://www.dana.org/uploadedFiles/Pdfs/Brain-Brief-Senses-Smell-and-Taste-FINAL.pdf
General article in the brain and smell
  
  
Geometry: Fixing a limit to injustice.  The ability of the Soul/Mind to do this demonstrates its Mastery over any condition: even the condition of interminable pain.

Smell is omni-directional, direct, with little or no mediation from the higher brain centers, and this is also true of sin.  Fixing a limit is an act of reason, we look in the closet to see that there is no monster there, but also we shut the closet door to confine the monster.  Virgil's entire exposition in this canto is to categorized and order the uncategorizable and the omnipresent.  He is making sin, the stink of sin, knowable, so that fear and injury has a limit.  He puts everything on the tabletop of reason, so that the Mind can manipulated what might otherwise destroy it.

It is also good to note here, that in the first three lines of this canto, the protagonists are standing near a circle of broken stones ... broken stones in a broken circle.  That is what sin does, it breaks the mold of life, love, vitality, and the possibility of grace.  It takes what is as solid as a rock (Remember Peter, and Christ's pun: On this rock I will build my church.) and as perfect and complete as a circle, and it breaks it up, and regresses creation back to chaos.  Virgil's exposition of all the geographical locations of sin in the remaining circles is how justice re-incorporates chaos back into divine order.  The justice — the often cruel justice — that we have seen, and will see more of as we complete our harrowing of Hell, is there to balance the scales.  But once those scales are balanced in the Last Judgement, neither justice, punishment, nor mercy will exist, because the scales have been balanced.  After that, we can throw the scales away.  But why is God's judgement so inflexible?  I think Dante might say because the quicker we balance those scales, the sooner we can throw them away.

Art as education, and as a mimesis of Nature's creative power.  The question of perpetual genesis.

Towards the end of this canto, the power of the artist is compared to the power God displays in Genesis.  His art could not be a copy of Nature, because before He spoke, there was no Nature, so mimesis cannot mean what it often commonly means: copy Nature's products.  What it does mean is that the artist, as Virgil says, is God's grandchild, and as such is also endowed with the power to create ex nihilo nihil fit?  It means that like God, the artist has the ability to create something out of nothing.  The interesting thing here is that Virgil emphasizes that it is Philosophy that teaches this, not art or poetry itself.  It is almost as if for the artist to recognize in him or herself this supreme power he or she must first rationally convince themselves that they have it — that is to say, we can, through the use of education — reason — find that portal to an inspiration that is beyond reason, and exists as God existed before He made the Universe: as a beinglessness with the pure and unlimited potential to manifest being. 

The pressure of time: At the beginning, pause, then learn, then move forward with alacrity.

At the beginning of this canto, the protagonists, pause, the stench creating an impasse that prevents them from immediately preceding.  They bide their time, and by means of insight and memory, they garner those resources, not the least of which is courage, which enables them to proceed.  Time, not Hell's Time, which as we have said is interminable, but Earth's mortal time, as it is made visible by celestial phenomenon, this earthly Time is the groove that the protagonists must follow on their pilgrimage to transcend Time.   Time, like Lady Fortune, is that Law which subjects all bodies, and is in this sense a source of compulsion, and even oppression, whereas, Space, as seem here in Virgil's comprehensive explanation of Hell's geography, can, even in Hell, be a comforting source of containment for those imprisoned by its laws.  Time and Space here are both sources of limitation, but just as narrow banks limit the course of water, they also add to its motion a self-purifying force.  So that even in Hell, they both become the generators of insight and art, the basic materials of manifestation so to speak, which imprison and circumscribe in order to tense a spring so that it might explode into eternity.  The fact that the protagonists know where to go — left, around, and down — and when to go, or stop, shows that their mastery comes not from resisting the laws of the 3 spatial dimensions (height, width, depth) and the 3 temporal ones (past, present, future), but by making use of them.  Knowing that creativity exists before Time and Space existed, tells us that the creative act comes through these dimensions, but does not draw its motive force from them.  The heresy of Photinus is the belief that the Son, of the Trinity, arose only as a temporal expression and did not exist prior to the time of the birth of Jesus is very similar to the Epicurean position which asserted that the soul is only the product and slave of space and time.  Dante, the writer, the artist, and the spiritual pilgrim, abominates these concepts, I would say, using a non-Christian symbology, because it is impossible to believe that potential — God — did not exist before the incarnation.  It is impossible to believe that something arose without the potential to arise.  Yet, something does arise from nothing, the vacuum is a plenum.  Potential is always the precursor of everything, including the operations of time and space.  To believe otherwise, may be a matter of faith, but not necessarily so.  Logic, philosophy, and reason also can guide us to a right understanding of this backgrounded illimitable quality.  There is ample evidence that Dante knew the Cabbala, and in that system, the Ain Soph is that unmanifest potential, which exists, and must have existed, as God's God, even before God's discovery of himself as a creative entity.  This is quite a different rationale for the existence of God than Saint Anselm's ontological tautology: God must exist, because we can conceive of a perfect being, and the primary element of perfection is existence.  But in this case, God must exist, because something is here, and potential must precede manifestation.  God is, the universe is, because it had the prior capacity to be. 


1  In su l'estremità d'un'alta ripa
2  che facevan gran pietre rotte in cerchio,
3  venimmo sopra più crudele stipa;

1  Upon the margin of a lofty bank
2  Which great rocks broken in a circle made,
3  We came upon a still more cruel throng;

4  e quivi, per l'orribile soperchio
5  del puzzo che 'l profondo abisso gitta,
6  ci raccostammo, in dietro, ad un coperchio

4  And there, by reason of the horrible
5  Excess of stench the deep abyss throws out,
6  We drew ourselves aside behind the cover

7  d'un grand' avello, ov' io vidi una scritta
8  che dicea: “Anastasio papa guardo,
9  lo qual trasse Fotin de la via dritta.”

7  Of a great tomb, whereon I saw a writing,
8  Which said: "Pope Anastasius I hold,
9  Whom out of the right way Photinus drew."

10  “Lo nostro scender conviene esser tardo,
11  sì che s'ausi un poco in prima il senso
12  al tristo fiato; e poi no i fia riguardo.”

10  "Slow it behoveth our descent to be,
11  So that the sense be first a little used
12  To the sad blast, and then we shall not heed it."

13  Così 'l maestro; e io “Alcun compenso,”
14  dissi lui, “trova che 'l tempo non passi
15  perduto.” Ed elli: “Vedi ch'a ciò penso.”

13  The Master thus; and unto him I said,
14  "Some compensation find, that the time pass not
15  Idly;" and he: "Thou seest I think of that.

16  “Figliuol mio, dentro da cotesti sassi,”
17  cominciò poi a dir, “son tre cerchietti
18  di grado in grado, come que' che lassi.

16  My son, upon the inside of these rocks,"
17  Began he then to say, "are three small circles,
18  From grade to grade, like those which thou art leaving.

19  Tutti son pien di spirti maladetti;
20  ma perché poi ti basti pur la vista,
21  intendi come e perché son costretti.

19  They all are full of spirits maledict;
20  But that hereafter sight alone suffice thee,
21  Hear how and wherefore they are in constraint.

22  D'ogne malizia, ch'odio in cielo acquista,
23  ingiuria è 'l fine, ed ogne fin cotale
24  o con forza o con frode altrui contrista.

22  Of every malice that wins hate in Heaven,
23  Injury is the end; and all such end
24  Either by force or fraud afflicteth others.


25  Ma perché frode è de l'uom proprio male,
26  più spiace a Dio; e però stan di sotto
27  li frodolenti, e più dolor li assale.

25  But because fraud is man's peculiar vice,
26  More it displeases God; and so stand lowest
27  The fraudulent, and greater dole assails them.

28  Di vïolenti il primo cerchio è tutto;
29  ma perché si fa forza a tre persone,
30  in tre gironi è distinto e costrutto.

28  All the first circle of the Violent is;
29  But since force may be used against three persons,
30  In three rounds 'tis divided and constructed.

31  A Dio, a sé, al prossimo si pòne
32  far forza, dico in loro e in lor cose,
33  come udirai con aperta ragione.

31  To God, to ourselves, and to our neighbour can we
32  Use force; I say on them and on their things,
33  As thou shalt hear with reason manifest.

34  Morte per forza e ferute dogliose
35  nel prossimo si danno, e nel suo avere
36  ruine, incendi e tollette dannose;

34  A death by violence, and painful wounds,
35  Are to our neighbour given; and in his substance
36  Ruin, and arson, and injurious levies;

37  onde omicide e ciascun che mal fiere,
38  guastatori e predon, tutti tormenta
39  lo giron primo per diverse schiere.

37  Whence homicides, and he who smites unjustly,
38  Marauders, and freebooters, the first round
39  Tormenteth all in companies diverse.

40  Puote omo avere in sé man vïolenta
41  e ne' suoi beni; e però nel secondo
42  giron convien che sanza pro si penta

40  Man may lay violent hands upon himself
41  And his own goods; and therefore in the second
42  Round must perforce without avail repent

43  qualunque priva sé del vostro mondo,
44  biscazza e fonde la sua facultade,
45  e piange là dov' esser de' giocondo.

43  Whoever of your world deprives himself,
44  Who games, and dissipates his property,
45  And weepeth there, where he should jocund be.

46  Puossi far forza ne la deïtade,
47  col cor negando e bestemmiando quella,
48  e spregiando natura e sua bontade;

46  Violence can be done the Deity,
47  In heart denying and blaspheming Him,
48  And by disdaining Nature and her bounty.

49  e però lo minor giron suggella
50  del segno suo e Soddoma e Caorsa
51  e chi, spregiando Dio col cor, favella.

49  And for this reason doth the smallest round
50  Seal with its signet Sodom and Cahors,
51  And who, disdaining God, speaks from the heart.

52  La frode, ond' ogne coscïenza è morsa,
53  può l'omo usare in colui che 'n lui fida
54  e in quel che fidanza non imborsa.

52  Fraud, wherewithal is every conscience stung,
53  A man may practise upon him who trusts,
54  And him who doth no confidence imburse.

55  Questo modo di retro par ch'incida
56  pur lo vinco d'amor che fa natura;
57  onde nel cerchio secondo s'annida

55  This latter mode, it would appear, dissevers
56  Only the bond of love which Nature makes;
57  Wherefore within the second circle nestle

58  ipocresia, lusinghe e chi affattura,
59  falsità, ladroneccio e simonia,
60  ruffian, baratti e simile lordura.

58  Hypocrisy, flattery, and who deals in magic,
59  Falsification, theft, and simony,
60  Panders, and barrators, and the like filth.

61  Per l'altro modo quell' amor s'oblia
62  che fa natura, e quel ch'è poi aggiunto,
63  di che la fede spezïal si cria;

61  By the other mode, forgotten is that love
62  Which Nature makes, and what is after added,
63  From which there is a special faith engendered.

64  onde nel cerchio minore, ov' è 'l punto
65  de l'universo in su che Dite siede,
66  qualunque trade in etterno è consunto.”

64  Hence in the smallest circle, where the point is
65  Of the Universe, upon which Dis is seated,
66  Whoe'er betrays for ever is consumed."

67  E io: “Maestro, assai chiara procede
68  la tua ragione, e assai ben distingue
69  questo baràtro e 'l popol ch'e' possiede.

67  And I: "My Master, clear enough proceeds
68  Thy reasoning, and full well distinguishes
69  This cavern and the people who possess it.

70  Ma dimmi: quei de la palude pingue,
71  che mena il vento, e che batte la pioggia,
72  e che s'incontran con sì aspre lingue,

70  But tell me, those within the fat lagoon,
71  Whom the wind drives, and whom the rain doth beat,
72  And who encounter with such bitter tongues,

73  perché non dentro da la città roggia
74  sono ei puniti, se Dio li ha in ira?
75  e se non li ha, perché sono a tal foggia?”

73  Wherefore are they inside of the red city
74  Not punished, if God has them in his wrath,
75  And if he has not, wherefore in such fashion?"

76  Ed elli a me “Perché tanto delira,”
77  disse, “lo 'ngegno tuo da quel che sòle?
78  o ver la mente dove altrove mira?

76  And unto me he said: "Why wanders so
77  Thine intellect from that which it is wont?
78  Or, sooth, thy mind where is it elsewhere looking?

79  Non ti rimembra di quelle parole
80  con le quai la tua Etica pertratta
81  le tre disposizion che 'l ciel non vole,

79  Hast thou no recollection of those words
80  With which thine Ethics thoroughly discusses
81  The dispositions three, that Heaven abides not,—

82  incontenenza, malizia e la matta
83  bestialitade? e come incontenenza
84  men Dio offende e men biasimo accatta?

82  Incontinence, and Malice, and insane
83  Bestiality? and how Incontinence
84  Less God offendeth, and less blame attracts?

85  Se tu riguardi ben questa sentenza,
86  e rechiti a la mente chi son quelli
87  che sù di fuor sostegnon penitenza,

85  If thou regardest this conclusion well,
86  And to thy mind recallest who they are
87  That up outside are undergoing penance,

88  tu vedrai ben perché da questi felli
89  sien dipartiti, e perché men crucciata
90  la divina vendetta li martelli.”

88  Clearly wilt thou perceive why from these felons
89  They separated are, and why less wroth
90  Justice divine doth smite them with its hammer."

91  “O sol che sani ogne vista turbata,
92  tu mi contenti sì quando tu solvi,
93  che, non men che saver, dubbiar m'aggrata.

91  "O Sun, that healest all distempered vision,
92  Thou dost content me so, when thou resolvest,
93  That doubting pleases me no less than knowing!

94  Ancora in dietro un poco ti rivolvi,”
95  diss' io, “là dove di' ch'usura offende
96  la divina bontade, e 'l groppo solvi.”

94  Once more a little backward turn thee," said I,
95  "There where thou sayest that usury offends
96  Goodness divine, and disengage the knot."

97  “Filosofia,” mi disse, “a chi la 'ntende,
98  nota, non pure in una sola parte,
99  come natura lo suo corso prende

97  "Philosophy," he said, "to him who heeds it,
98  Noteth, not only in one place alone,
99  After what manner Nature takes her course

100  dal divino 'ntelletto e da sua arte;
101  e se tu ben la tua Fisica note,
102  tu troverai, non dopo molte carte,

100  From Intellect Divine, and from its art;
101  And if thy Physics carefully thou notest,
102  After not many pages shalt thou find,

103  che l'arte vostra quella, quanto pote,
104  segue, come 'l maestro fa 'l discente;
105  sì che vostr' arte a Dio quasi è nepote.

103  That this your art as far as possible
104  Follows, as the disciple doth the master;
105  That your art is, as it were, God's grandchild.

106  Da queste due, se tu ti rechi a mente
107  lo Genesì dal principio, convene
108  prender sua vita e avanzar la gente;

106  From these two, if thou bringest to thy mind
107  Genesis at the beginning, it behoves
108  Mankind to gain their life and to advance;

109  e perché l'usuriere altra via tene,
110  per sé natura e per la sua seguace
111  dispregia, poi ch'in altro pon la spene.

109  And since the usurer takes another way,
110  Nature herself and in her follower
111  Disdains he, for elsewhere he puts his hope.

112  Ma seguimi oramai che 'l gir mi piace;
113  ché i Pesci guizzan su per l'orizzonta,
114  e 'l Carro tutto sovra 'l Coro giace,

112  But follow, now, as I would fain go on,
113  For quivering are the Fishes on the horizon,
114  And the Wain wholly over Caurus lies,

115  e 'l balzo via là oltra si dismonta.”

115  And far beyond there we descend the crag."

Canto XII
If Canto XI was a kind of stagnation, a stuck place where stench accumulates and where the protagonist find shelter while Virgil lays out the map of Hell for the aspirant, then Canto XII is full of motion, even the cliff of the landscape moving down slope at the violent reaction of Hell and Earth to being injected by Divine Love.  There is motion, and there is mixture, which makes for monsters, those hybrid creatures — the Minotaur and the Centaurs — whose entities are conglomerates of species which were never meant to breed, and whose licentiousness gave birth to atrocities.  

Dante begins Canto XII be extending the broken rock metaphor with which he began Canto XI, but now the scale has grown enormously.  (Recall how he used this device of "evolving" a metaphor in the circle of lust, where the bird metaphor keeps evolving from flock, to line of cranes, to a pair of turtledoves, and here he carries the same metaphor over to begin these two canto's, tying the pair together stylistically, while totally changing the stagnant, theological explanation of Canto XI to a swirl of action and various speakers in Canto XII — the conversation wherein Virgil insults the Minotaur and compels the cannibal to let them past, this we have seen before, but now the insult is more subtle and more biting, and the Minotaur, for all his rage, still seems wedded to the cascade of rocks where he lounges, and the pilgrims pass.
Then come the Centaurs, who though in Hell, suffer only to the extent that their tasks and motions as punishers, is incessant.  Of these there are thousands and thousands, racing along the narrow banks of a boiling river of blood, and piercing with arrows any of the mobs of sinners who attempt to escape this dreadful moat.  Three Centaurs (for Cryptologists, there's that number 3 again) challenge the protagonists, but then help them, not unwillingly, as we have seen other monsters do in the poem so far, but with a sense of understanding.  Nessus, who is singled out for his crimes and impetuosity, becomes tame in ferrying the living body of Dante across the ford of the boiling blood river.  And it is Nessus, who with permission from Virgil, explains who these sinners are, and why some are allowed to rise from the boiling flood, some only to the eyebrows, some to the throat, some to the chest, and some, where the blood covers only their feet.  These are those  who have done deliberate violence to others, and since they are now in Hell for it, to themselves, and they are submerged to different depths according to the egregiousness of their crimes.

Here are some questions worth pondering: 

Are the punishers, the centaurs, themselves being punished?  After all, they are merely eternally pursuing the pleasures of the hunt, which was also the occupation of their lives.  And, in the case of Nessus, teaching too, which they in life took up as their professions, remains a possibility for them ... and all this prompts the question: Are there some unnatural mutations which nevertheless serve a purpose in Nature and for the Divine?  Can it be that some monsters are not monstrous?

Is the landscape that we all feel around us, as well as the weather, influenced by our collective moral and emotional state?  This idea is still with us: The idea that there are no truly impersonal events — and even the shapes of mountains and rivers and the destruction of storms, earthquakes, and cyclones are somehow the karmic results of human activity, and that activity would not only be burning fossil fuels, mining, clear-cutting, etc.  — but also waging war, expressing hatred and greed, wallowing one's whole life in a river of anger and that internal "blood boiling" feeling which rage is said to engender.  We know how the stress of incessant anger works on the body, and we know how this personal anger spills over into the destructive enterprises.  But do we seriously consider that in addition to shaping history, that there is also a geographical price to pay, as, for example, fracking causing earthquake, fossil fuel burning causing the greenhouse effect, melting the icecaps and raising the sea level, and over grazing or clear-cutting causing desertification.  Might there not also be an emotional state that influences not only our human internal state, but the climate and landscape too.  In the Divine Commedia, these human states create and sustain a landscape and an atmosphere that mirrors the moral condition of its denizen.  How far-fetched is it to ponder that our cities, our landscapes, our climate also mirrors our moral condition?  This monstrous mixing which has created monstrous mutants, is also happening at a macro scale, in so far that we are not only warping ourselves with our violence, but also warping our environment, so that it can no longer fulfill its natural function as a nourisher, but which, like the centaurs in Canto XII, has now become our punisher.  All this is very anthropomorphic, but is it wrong to relate to whatever world we find ourselves in as one subjectivity to another?  And is the only alternative to this anthropomorphizing that everything either inside us or outside us is only the result of blind chance and the cause and effect changes that happen in gravity, electromagnetic, chemical, and strong and weak nuclear force fields?  If we are reading Dante seriously, we have to decide if such a thing as an entity with volition could actually exist.  And if so, at what scale does this volitional subjective entity exist?  At the scale of tube worms?  Of galaxies?  Albert Sweitzer said: "I am life that wants to live, in the midst of life that wants to live."  Can we even develop a moral sense beyond our own gratification of the moment without the belief that others — at any scale — also have an inner sense of their own life, a sense that can be injured, and whose injury is part of a whole which suffers also when it causes or is made to suffer?

I think, and I believe Dante thought this too, that such questions elude theology and reason, for all their centuries of attempts to resolve them.  I think that poetry, because it involves the physiology of breathing and the speech act, and because it may utilize theology and reason to probe the profundity of dreams and of the waking-imagination, poetry, more even than physics, or neurological science, opens an experiential gap in the impregnability of others — poetry allows us to enter our own subjective states so fully that we begin also to experience the subjectivity of other people and also of what we too often consider to be inanimate in nature.  We are ourselves hybrid creatures, part physical metaphysics, and part metaphysics becoming physical, and Dante, by presenting the protagonist of his unenlightened self, as a living being among the dead, is showing us the ultimate conglomeration: A human being facing a moral dilemma.   

1  Era lo loco ov' a scender la riva
2  venimmo, alpestro e, per quel che v'er' anco,
3  tal, ch'ogne vista ne sarebbe schiva.

1  The place where to descend the bank we came
2  Was alpine, and from what was there, moreover,
3  Of such a kind that every eye would shun it.

4  Qual è quella ruina che nel fianco
5  di qua da Trento l'Adice percosse,
6  o per tremoto o per sostegno manco,

4  Such as that ruin is which in the flank
5  Smote, on this side of Trent, the Adige,
6  Either by earthquake or by failing stay,

7  che da cima del monte, onde si mosse,
8  al piano è sì la roccia discoscesa,
9  ch'alcuna via darebbe a chi sù fosse:

7  For from the mountain's top, from which it moved,
8  Unto the plain the cliff is shattered so,
9  Some path 'twould give to him who was above;

10  cotal di quel burrato era la scesa;
11  e 'n su la punta de la rotta lacca
12  l'infamïa di Creti era distesa

10  Even such was the descent of that ravine,
11  And on the border of the broken chasm
12  The infamy of Crete was stretched along,

13  che fu concetta ne la falsa vacca;
14  e quando vide noi, sé stesso morse,
15  sì come quei cui l'ira dentro fiacca.

13  Who was conceived in the fictitious cow;
14  And when he us beheld, he bit himself,
15  Even as one whom anger racks within.

16  Lo savio mio inver' lui gridò: “Forse
17  tu credi che qui sia 'l duca d'Atene,
18  che sù nel mondo la morte ti porse?

16  My Sage towards him shouted: "Peradventure
17  hou think'st that here may be the Duke of Athens,
18  Who in the world above brought death to thee?

19  Pàrtiti, bestia, ché questi non vene
20  ammaestrato da la tua sorella,
21  ma vassi per veder le vostre pene.”

19  Get thee gone, beast, for this one cometh not
20  Instructed by thy sister, but he comes
21  In order to behold your punishments."

22  Qual è quel toro che si slaccia in quella
23  c'ha ricevuto già 'l colpo mortale,
24  che gir non sa, ma qua e là saltella,

22  As is that bull who breaks loose at the moment
23  In which he has received the mortal blow,
24  Who cannot walk, but staggers here and there,

25  vid' io lo Minotauro far cotale;
26  e quello accorto gridò: “Corri al varco;
27  mentre ch'e' 'nfuria, è buon che tu ti cale.”

25  The Minotaur beheld I do the like;
26  And he, the wary, cried: "Run to the passage;
27  While he wroth, 'tis well thou shouldst descend."

28  Così prendemmo via giù per lo scarco
29  di quelle pietre, che spesso moviensi
30  sotto i miei piedi per lo novo carco.

28  Thus down we took our way o'er that discharge
29  Of stones, which oftentimes did move themselves
30  Beneath my feet, from the unwonted burden.

31  Io gia pensando; e quei disse: “Tu pensi
32  forse a questa ruina, ch'è guardata
33  da quell' ira bestial ch'i' ora spensi.

31  Thoughtful I went; and he said: "Thou art thinking
32  Perhaps upon this ruin, which is guarded
33  By that brute anger which just now I quenched.

34  Or vo' che sappi che l'altra fïata
35  ch'i' discesi qua giù nel basso inferno,
36  questa roccia non era ancor cascata.

34  Now will I have thee know, the other time
35  I here descended to the nether Hell,
36  This precipice had not yet fallen down.

37  Ma certo poco pria, se ben discerno,
38  che venisse colui che la gran preda
39  levò a Dite del cerchio superno,

37  But truly, if I well discern, a little
38  Before His coming who the mighty spoil
39  Bore off from Dis, in the supernal circle,

40  da tutte parti l'alta valle feda
41  tremò sì, ch'i' pensai che l'universo
42  sentisse amor, per lo qual è chi creda

40  Upon all sides the deep and loathsome valley
41  Trembled so, that I thought the Universe
42  Was thrilled with love, by which there are who think 

43  più volte il mondo in caòsso converso;
44  e in quel punto questa vecchia roccia,
45  qui e altrove, tal fece riverso.

43  The world ofttimes converted into chaos;
44  And at that moment this primeval crag
45  Both here and elsewhere made such overthrow.

46  Ma ficca li occhi a valle, ché s'approccia
47  la riviera del sangue in la qual bolle
48  qual che per vïolenza in altrui noccia.”

46  But fix thine eyes below; for draweth near
47  The river of blood, within which boiling is
48  Whoe'er by violence doth injure others."

49  Oh cieca cupidigia e ira folle,
50  che sì ci sproni ne la vita corta,
51  e ne l'etterna poi sì mal c'immolle!

49  O blind cupidity, O wrath insane,
50  That spurs us onward so in our short life,
51  And in the eternal then so badly steeps us!

52  Io vidi un'ampia fossa in arco torta,
53  come quella che tutto 'l piano abbraccia,
54  secondo ch'avea detto la mia scorta;

52  I saw an ample moat bent like a bow,
53  As one which all the plain encompasses,
54  Conformable to what my Guide had said.

55  e tra 'l piè de la ripa ed essa, in traccia
56  corrien centauri, armati di saette,
57  come solien nel mondo andare a caccia.

55  And between this and the embankment's foot
56  Centaurs in file were running, armed with arrows,
57  As in the world they used the chase to follow.

58  Veggendoci calar, ciascun ristette,
59  e de la schiera tre si dipartiro
60  con archi e asticciuole prima elette;

58  Beholding us descend, each one stood still,
59  And from the squadron three detached themselves,
60  With bows and arrows in advance selected;

 
61  e l'un gridò da lungi: “A qual martiro
62  venite voi che scendete la costa?
63  Ditel costinci; se non, l'arco tiro.”

61  And from afar one cried: "Unto what torment
62  Come ye, who down the hillside are descending?
63  Tell us from there; if not, I draw the bow."

64  Lo mio maestro disse: “La risposta
65  farem noi a Chirón costà di presso:
66  mal fu la voglia tua sempre sì tosta.”

64  My Master said: "Our answer will we make
65  To Chiron, near you there; in evil hour,
66  That will of thine was evermore so hasty."

67  Poi mi tentò, e disse: “Quelli è Nesso,
68  che morì per la bella Deianira,
69  e fé di sé la vendetta elli stesso.

67  Then touched he me, and said: "This one is Nessus,
68  Who perished for the lovely Dejanira,
69  And for himself, himself did vengeance take.

70  E quel di mezzo, ch'al petto si mira,
71  è il gran Chirón, il qual nodrì Achille;
72  quell' altro è Folo, che fu sì pien d'ira.

70  And he in the midst, who at his breast is gazing,
71  Is the great Chiron, who brought up Achilles;
72  That other Pholus is, who was so wrathful.

73  Dintorno al fosso vanno a mille a mille,
74  saettando qual anima si svelle
75  del sangue più che sua colpa sortille.”

73  Thousands and thousands go about the moat
74  Shooting with shafts whatever soul emerges
75  Out of the blood, more than his crime allots."

76  Noi ci appressammo a quelle fiere isnelle:
77  Chirón prese uno strale, e con la cocca
78  fece la barba in dietro a le mascelle.

76  Near we approached unto those monsters fleet;
77  Chiron an arrow took, and with the notch
78  Backward upon his jaws he put his beard.

79  Quando s'ebbe scoperta la gran bocca,
80  disse a' compagni: “Siete voi accorti
81  che quel di retro move ciò ch'el tocca?

79  After he had uncovered his great mouth,
80  He said to his companions: "Are you ware
81  That he behind moveth whate'er he touches?

82  Così non soglion far li piè d'i morti.”
83  E 'l mio buon duca, che già li er' al petto,
84  dove le due nature son consorti,

82  Thus are not wont to do the feet of dead men."
83  And my good Guide, who now was at his breast,
84  Where the two natures are together joined,

85  rispuose: “Ben è vivo, e sì soletto
86  mostrar li mi convien la valle buia;
87  necessità 'l ci 'nduce, e non diletto.

85  Replied: "Indeed he lives, and thus alone
86  Me it behoves to show him the dark valley;
87  Necessity, and not delight, impels us.

88  Tal si partì da cantare alleluia
89  che mi commise quest' officio novo:
90  non è ladron, né io anima fuia.

88  Some one withdrew from singing Halleluja,
89  Who unto me committed this new office;
90  No thief is he, nor I a thievish spirit.

91  Ma per quella virtù per cu' io movo
92  li passi miei per sì selvaggia strada,
93  danne un de' tuoi, a cui noi siamo a provo,

91  But by that virtue through which I am moving
92  My steps along this savage thoroughfare,
93  Give us some one of thine, to be with us,

94  e che ne mostri là dove si guada,
95  e che porti costui in su la groppa,
96  ché non è spirto che per l'aere vada.”

94  And who may show us where to pass the ford,
95  And who may carry this one on his back;
96  For 'tis no spirit that can walk the air."

97  Chirón si volse in su la destra poppa,
98  e disse a Nesso: “Torna, e sì li guida,
99  e fa cansar s'altra schiera v'intoppa.”

97  Upon his right breast Chiron wheeled about,
98  And said to Nessus: "Turn and do thou guide them,
99  And warn aside, if other band may meet you."

100  Or ci movemmo con la scorta fida
101  lungo la proda del bollor vermiglio,
102  dove i bolliti facieno alte strida.

100  We with our faithful escort onward moved
101  Along the brink of the vermilion boiling,
102  Wherein the boiled were uttering loud laments.
 
103  Io vidi gente sotto infino al ciglio;
104  e 'l gran centauro disse: “E' son tiranni
105  che dier nel sangue e ne l'aver di piglio.

103  People I saw within up to the eyebrows,
104  And the great Centaur said: "Tyrants are these,
105  Who dealt in bloodshed and in pillaging.

106  Quivi si piangon li spietati danni;
107  quivi è Alessandro, e Dïonisio fero
108  che fé Cicilia aver dolorosi anni.

106  Here they lament their pitiless mischiefs; here
107  Is Alexander, and fierce Dionysius
108  Who upon Sicily brought dolorous years.

109  E quella fronte c'ha 'l pel così nero,
110  è Azzolino; e quell' altro ch'è biondo,
111  è Opizzo da Esti, il qual per vero

109  That forehead there which has the hair so black
110  Is Azzolin; and the other who is blond,
111  Obizzo is of Esti, who, in truth,

112  fu spento dal figliastro sù nel mondo.”
113  Allor mi volsi al poeta, e quei disse:
114  “Questi ti sia or primo, e io secondo.”

112  Up in the world was by his stepson slain."
113  Then turned I to the Poet; and he said,
114  "Now he be first to thee, and second I."

115  Poco più oltre il centauro s'affisse
116  sovr' una gente che 'nfino a la gola
117  parea che di quel bulicame uscisse.

115  A little farther on the Centaur stopped
116  Above a folk, who far down as the throat
117  Seemed from that boiling stream to issue forth.

118  Mostrocci un'ombra da l'un canto sola,
119  dicendo: “Colui fesse in grembo a Dio
120  lo cor che 'n su Tamisi ancor si cola.”

118  A shade he showed us on one side alone,
119  Saying: "He cleft asunder in God's bosom
120  The heart that still upon the Thames is honoured."

121  Poi vidi gente che di fuor del rio
122  tenean la testa e ancor tutto 'l casso;
123  e di costoro assai riconobb' io.

121  Then people saw I, who from out the river
122  Lifted their heads and also all the chest;
123  And many among these I recognised.

124  Così a più a più si facea basso
125  quel sangue, sì che cocea pur li piedi;
126  e quindi fu del fosso il nostro passo.

124  Thus ever more and more grew shallower
125  That blood, so that the feet alone it covered;
126  And there across the moat our passage was.

127  “Sì come tu da questa parte vedi
128  lo bulicame che sempre si scema,”
129  disse 'l centauro, “voglio che tu credi

127  "Even as thou here upon this side beholdest
128  The boiling stream, that aye diminishes,"
129  The Centaur said, "I wish thee to believe

130  che da quest' altra a più a più giù prema
131  lo fondo suo, infin ch'el si raggiunge
132  ove la tirannia convien che gema.

130  That on this other more and more declines
131  Its bed, until it reunites itself
132  Where it behoveth tyranny to groan.
 
133  La divina giustizia di qua punge
134  quell' Attila che fu flagello in terra,
135  e Pirro e Sesto; e in etterno munge

133  Justice divine, upon this side, is goading
134  That Attila, who was a scourge on earth,
135  And Pyrrhus, and Sextus; and for ever milks
 
136  le lagrime, che col bollor diserra,
137  a Rinier da Corneto, a Rinier Pazzo,
138  che fecero a le strade tanta guerra.”

136  The tears which with the boiling it unseals
137  In Rinier da Corneto and Rinier Pazzo,
138  Who made upon the highways so much war."

139  Poi si rivolse e ripassossi 'l guazzo.

139  Then back he turned, and passed again the ford.

Canto XIII
Dante slows the pace down from the previous Canto by giving us a comically ironic view of a horse's ass, re-crossing the ford of the blood river.  We are in another place where looking back is futile — the Centaur, Nessus, who brought Dante across the river is gone — and looking forward is also futile.   The protagonists are in a wood of poisonous thorn trees.  The wood is pathless and unmarked.  The way forward is through, and, as it turns out, through the pain of the souls who are doomed to this level of Hell.  These are suicides, turned into thorn bushes, and when Virgil asks Dante to break one of the branches, the branch sizzles like a green log, bleeding blood and words.  The suicide tells his story, self-justifying, as all the stories of the damned have been, and yet, unlike Virgil's condemnation of the emotion of pity for other sinners, here, not only Dante but Virgil too feels pity.  Why?  Perhaps because, as a pagan, Virgil's view of suicide, in this case that of a former minister to Frederick II, is not encumbered by the Christian view that we do not own our own lives — God does — and that taking this life is both committing murder, and also blaspheming God by refusing to accept the fate that He has assigned to us.  The suicide in this case, kills himself out of shame when accused of disloyalty and embezzlement.  Was he innocent of the embezzlement?  Well, to Dante, the poet, it does not matter.  Public shame, deserved or not, is not a justification for self-murder.  But you can't help wondering that Dante, the person, in his exile, and in his shame from being exiled, and falsely accused, also contemplated self-murder.  His pity for this character is so profound that he asks Virgil to speak for him — i.e., he surrenders his will, for that of his teacher — and Virgil lets him do it.  The master, feeling pity himself, he does not rebuke his protege for his weakness.  Yet, we are still left with the question of will, and with it, the question of culpability.  If there is no will, there can be no sin, so suicide is a kind of ultimate sin, in the sense that it is an act of will, perhaps the only act of will, which deprives the actor of all future acts of will.  Suddenly, we realize that suicide of the will is happening all the time, and is an element in a great many sins, especially sins of incontinence: overeating, over indulgence in sex, and so forth, and in all those behaviors where we say to ourselves: I can't help it.  Besides the disingenuous public minister, other sinners also appear in this Canto.  They are those who murdered their own stores by deliberate wastralness, and then put themselves in situations where someone else is obliged to take their lives.  There are two negative Anima figures appearing in this Canto: the Harpies who feed on the transformed sinners' foliage, and the shoe-mastiffs who chase the profligate sinners to tear them limb from limb.  When one of these pursued sinners attempts to take cover in a thorn bush, he continues his maliciousness, because he once again not only brings harm to himself, but also to another who have has no part in his previous debauchery.  It seems obvious enough that Dante has chosen this transformation of the sinners into plants as a way to emphasize this ultimate denial of will, since plants, unable to volitionally move from a fixed spot, cannot but accept the fate that their chance seeding and rooting has determined for them, and the text makes it clear that even after the last judgement, and the suicides are returned to their bodies, they will not be restoredto a condition of will.  On the contrary, they are doomed to drag their bodies back to this very wood, and are condemned to hang themselves from the very thorn bush that they once were.  There is a triple parody of scripture here: the parable of the sower, the thorn crown of Jesus during the crucifixion, and the hanging of Judas, these allusions being subtle but clear enough to readers who have not surrendered their will in interpreting the text.  The Canto ends with the story of a man who has hung himself in his own house, a crime that must have been particularly poignant to Dante, who was deprived of his home in exile.  How could anyone throw both home and life away as an act of their own will?  Here, Dante does show sympathy, but no compassion.  Violence against oneself for Dante, is simply intolerable.
     
1  Non era ancor di là Nesso arrivato,
2  quando noi ci mettemmo per un bosco
3  che da neun sentiero era segnato.

1  Not yet had Nessus reached the other side,
2  When we had put ourselves within a wood,
3  That was not marked by any path whatever.

4  Non fronda verde, ma di color fosco;
5  non rami schietti, ma nodosi e 'nvolti;
6  non pomi v'eran, ma stecchi con tòsco.
4  Not foliage green, but of a dusky colour,
5  Not branches smooth, but gnarled and intertangled,
6  Not apple-trees were there, but thorns with poison.
7  Non han sì aspri sterpi né sì folti
8  quelle fiere selvagge che 'n odio hanno
9  tra Cecina e Corneto i luoghi cólti.
7  Such tangled thickets have not, nor so dense,
8  Those savage wild beasts, that in hatred hold
9  'Twixt Cecina and Corneto the tilled places.
10  Quivi le brutte Arpie lor nidi fanno,
11  che cacciar de le Strofade i Troiani
12  con tristo annunzio di futuro danno. 
10  There do the hideous Harpies make their nests,
11  Who chased the Trojans from the Strophades,
12  With sad announcement of impending doom;
13  Ali hanno late, e colli e visi umani,
14  piè con artigli, e pennuto 'l gran ventre;
15  fanno lamenti in su li alberi strani.
13  Broad wings have they, and necks and faces human,
14  And feet with claws, and their great bellies fledged;
15  They make laments upon the wondrous trees.
16  E 'l buon maestro “Prima che più entre,
17  sappi che se' nel secondo girone,”
18  mi cominciò a dire, “e sarai mentre
16  And the good Master: "Ere thou enter farther,
17  Know that thou art within the second round,"
18 Thus he began to say, "and shalt be, till
19  che tu verrai ne l'orribil sabbione.
20  Però riguarda ben; sì vederai
21  cose che torrien fede al mio sermone.”
19  Thou comest out upon the horrible sand;
20  Therefore look well around, and thou shalt see
21  Things that will credence give unto my speech."

22  Io sentia d'ogne parte trarre guai
23  e non vedea persona che 'l facesse;
24  per ch'io tutto smarrito m'arrestai.
22  I heard on all sides lamentations uttered,
23  And person none beheld I who might make them,
24  Whence, utterly bewildered, I stood still.
25  Cred' ïo ch'ei credette ch'io credesse
26  che tante voci uscisser, tra quei bronchi,
27  da gente che per noi si nascondesse.
25  I think he thought that I perhaps might think
26  So many voices issued through those trunks
27  From people who concealed themselves from us;
28  Però disse 'l maestro: “Se tu tronchi
29  qualche fraschetta d'una d'este piante,
30  li pensier c'hai si faran tutti monchi.”
28  Therefore the Master said: "If thou break off
29  Some little spray from any of these trees,
30  The thoughts thou hast will wholly be made vain."
31  Allor porsi la mano un poco avante
32  e colsi un ramicel da un gran pruno;
33  e 'l tronco suo gridò: “Perché mi schiante?”
31  Then stretched I forth my hand a little forward,
32  And plucked a branchlet off from a great thorn;
33  And the trunk cried, "Why dost thou mangle me?"
34  Da che fatto fu poi di sangue bruno,
35  ricominciò a dir: “Perché mi scerpi?
36  non hai tu spirto di pietade alcuno?
34  After it had become embrowned with blood,
35  It recommenced its cry: "Why dost thou rend me?
36  Hast thou no spirit of pity whatsoever?
37  Uomini fummo, e or siam fatti sterpi:
38  ben dovrebb' esser la tua man più pia,
39  se state fossimo anime di serpi.”
37  Men once we were, and now are changed to trees;
38  Indeed, thy hand should be more pitiful,
39  Even if the souls of serpents we had been."
40  Come d'un stizzo verde ch'arso sia
41  da l'un de' capi, che da l'altro geme
42  e cigola per vento che va via,
40  As out of a green brand, that is on fire
41  At one of the ends, and from the other drips
42  And hisses with the wind that is escaping;
43  sì de la scheggia rotta usciva insieme
44  parole e sangue; ond' io lasciai la cima
45  cadere, e stetti come l'uom che teme.
43  So from that splinter issued forth together
44  Both words and blood; whereat I let the tip
45  Fall, and stood like a man who is afraid.
46  “S'elli avesse potuto creder prima,”
47  rispuose 'l savio mio, “anima lesa,
48  ciò c'ha veduto pur con la mia rima,
46  "Had he been able sooner to believe,"
47  My Sage made answer, "O thou wounded soul,
48  What only in my verses he has seen,
49  non averebbe in te la man distesa;
50  ma la cosa incredibile mi fece
51  indurlo ad ovra ch'a me stesso pesa.
49  Not upon thee had he stretched forth his hand;
50  Whereas the thing incredible has caused me
51  To put him to an act which grieveth me.
52  Ma dilli chi tu fosti, si che 'n vece
53  d'alcun' ammenda tua fama rinfreschi
54  nel mondo sù, dove tornar li lece.”
52  But tell him who thou wast, so that by way
53  Of some amends thy fame he may refresh
54  Up in the world, to which he can return."
55  E 'l tronco: “Si col dolce dir m'adeschi,
56  ch'i' non posso tacere; e voi non gravi
57  perch' ïo un poco a ragionar m'inveschi.
55  And the trunk said: "So thy sweet words allure me,
56  I cannot silent be; and you be vexed not,
57  That I a little to discourse am tempted.
58  Io son colui che tenni ambo le chiavi
59  del cor di Federigo, e che le volsi,
60  serrando e diserrando, sì soavi,

58  I am the one who both keys had in keeping
59  Of Frederick's heart, and turned them to and fro
60  So softly in unlocking and in locking,

61  che dal secreto suo quasi ogn' uom tolsi;
62  fede portai al glorïoso offizio,
63  tanto ch'i' ne perde' li sonni e ' polsi.
61  That from his secrets most men I withheld;
62  Fidelity I bore the glorious office
63  So great, I lost thereby my sleep and pulses.
64  La meretrice che mai da l'ospizio
65  di Cesare non torse li occhi putti,
66  morte comune e de le corti vizio,
64  The courtesan who never from the dwelling
65  Of Caesar turned aside her strumpet eyes,
66  Death universal and the vice of courts,
67  infiammò contra me li animi tutti;
68  e li 'nfiammati infiammar sì Augusto,
69  che ' lieti onor tornaro in tristi lutti.
67  Inflamed against me all the other minds,
68  And they, inflamed, did so inflame Augustus,
69  That my glad honours turned to dismal mournings.
70  L'animo mio, per disdegnoso gusto,
71  credendo col morir fuggir disdegno,
72  ingiusto fece me contra me giusto.

70  My spirit, in disdainful exultation,
71  Thinking by dying to escape disdain,
72  Made me unjust against myself, the just.
73  Per le nove radici d'esto legno
74  vi giuro che già mai non ruppi fede
75  al mio segnor, che fu d'onor sì degno.
73  I, by the roots unwonted of this wood,
74  Do swear to you that never broke I faith
75  Unto my lord, who was so worthy of honour;
76  E se di voi alcun nel mondo riede,
77  conforti la memoria mia, che giace
78  ancor del colpo che 'nvidia le diede.”
76  And to the world if one of you return,
77  Let him my memory comfort, which is lying
78  Still prostrate from the blow that envy dealt it."
79  Un poco attese, e poi “Da ch'el si tace,”
80  disse 'l poeta a me, “non perder l'ora;
81  ma parla, e chiedi a lui, se più ti piace.”
79  Waited awhile, and then: "Since he is silent,"
80  The Poet said to me, "lose not the time,
81  But speak, and question him, if more may please thee."
82  Ond' ïo a lui: “Domandal tu ancora
83  di quel che credi ch'a me satisfaccia;
84  ch'i' non potrei, tanta pietà m'accora.”
82  Whence I to him: "Do thou again inquire
83  Concerning what thou thinks't will satisfy me;
84  For I cannot, such pity is in my heart."
85  Perciò ricominciò: “Se l'om ti faccia
86  liberamente ciò che 'l tuo dir priega,
87  spirito incarcerato, ancor ti piaccia
85  Therefore he recommenced: "So may the man
86  Do for thee freely what thy speech implores,
87  Spirit incarcerate, again be pleased

88  di dirne come l'anima si lega
89  in questi nocchi; e dinne, se tu puoi,
90  s'alcuna mai di tai membra si spiega.”
88  To tell us in what way the soul is bound
89  Within these knots; and tell us, if thou canst,
90  If any from such members e'er is freed."
 91  Allor soffiò il tronco forte, e poi
92  si convertì quel vento in cotal voce:
93  “Brievemente sarà risposto a voi.
91  Then blew the trunk amain, and afterward
92  The wind was into such a voice converted:
93  "With brevity shall be replied to you.
94  Quando si parte l'anima feroce
95  dal corpo ond' ella stessa s'è disvelta,
96  Minòs la manda a la settima foce.
94  When the exasperated soul abandons
95  The body whence it rent itself away,
96  Minos consigns it to the seventh abyss.
97  Cade in la selva, e non l'è parte scelta;
98  ma là dove fortuna la balestra,
99  quivi germoglia come gran di spelta.
97  It falls into the forest, and no part
98  Is chosen for it; but where Fortune hurls it,
99  There like a grain of spelt it germinates.
100  Surge in vermena e in pianta silvestra:
101  l'Arpie, pascendo poi de le sue foglie,
102  fanno dolore, e al dolor fenestra.
100  It springs a sapling, and a forest tree;
101  The Harpies, feeding then upon its leaves,
102  Do pain create, and for the pain an outlet.
103  Come l'altre verrem per nostre spoglie,
104  ma non però ch'alcuna sen rivesta,
105  ché non è giusto aver ciò ch'om si toglie.

103  Like others for our spoils shall we return;
104  But not that any one may them revest,
105  For 'tis not just to have what one casts off.
106  Qui le strascineremo, e per la mesta
107  selva saranno i nostri corpi appesi,
108  ciascuno al prun de l'ombra sua molesta.”
106  Here we shall drag them, and along the dismal
107  Forest our bodies shall suspended be,
108  Each to the thorn of his molested shade."
109  Noi eravamo ancora al tronco attesi,
110  credendo ch'altro ne volesse dire,
111  quando noi fummo d'un romor sorpresi,
109  We were attentive still unto the trunk,
110  Thinking that more it yet might wish to tell us,
111  When by a tumult we were overtaken,
112  similemente a colui che venire
113  sente 'l porco e la caccia a la sua posta,
114  ch'ode le bestie, e le frasche stormire.
112  In the same way as he is who perceives
113  The boar and chase approaching to his stand,
114  Who hears the crashing of the beasts and branches;
115  Ed ecco due da la sinistra costa,
116  nudi e graffiati, fuggendo si forte,
117  che de la selva rompieno ogne rosta.
115  And two behold! upon our left-hand side,
116  Naked and scratched, fleeing so furiously,
117  That of the forest, every fan they broke.
118  Quel dinanzi: “Or accorri, accorri, morte!”
119  E l'altro, cui pareva tardar troppo,
120  gridava: “Lano, sì non furo accorte
118  He who was in advance: "Now help, Death, help!"
119  And the other one, who seemed to lag too much,
120  Was shouting: "Lano, were not so alert
121  le gambe tue a le giostre dal Toppo!”
122  E poi che forse li fallia la lena,
123  di sé e d'un cespuglio fece un groppo.
121  Those legs of thine at joustings of the Toppo!"
122  And then, perchance because his breath was failing,
123  He grouped himself together with a bush.
124  Di rietro a loro era la selva piena
125  di nere cagne, bramose e correnti
126  come veltri ch'uscisser di catena.
124  Behind them was the forest full of black
125  She-mastiffs, ravenous, and swift of foot
126  As greyhounds, who are issuing from the chain.
127  In quel che s'appiattò miser li denti,
128  e quel dilaceraro a brano a brano;
129  poi sen portar quelle membra dolenti.
127  On him who had crouched down they set their teeth,
128  And him they lacerated piece by piece,
129  Thereafter bore away those aching members.
130  Presemi allor la mia scorta per mano,
131  e menommi al cespuglio che piangea
132  per le rotture sanguinenti in vano.

130  Thereat my Escort took me by the hand,
131  And led me to the bush, that all in vain
132  Was weeping from its bloody lacerations.
133  “O Iacopo,” dicea, “da Santo Andre
134  che t'è giovato di me fare schermo?
135  che colpa ho io de la tua vita rea?”
133  "O Jacopo," it said, "of Sant' Andrea,
134  What helped it thee of me to make a screen?
135  What blame have I in thy nefarious life?"
136  Quando 'l maestro fu sovr' esso fermo,
137  disse: “Chi fosti, che per tante punte
138  soffi con sangue doloroso sermo?”
136  When near him had the Master stayed his steps,
137  He said: "Who wast thou, that through wounds so many
138  Art blowing out with blood thy dolorous speech?"
139  Ed elli a noi: “O anime che giunte
140  siete a veder lo strazio disonesto
141  c'ha le mie fronde sì da me disgiunte,
139  And he to us: "O souls, that hither come
140  To look upon the shameful massacre
141  That has so rent away from me my leaves,
142  raccoglietele al piè del tristo cesto.
143  I' fui de la città che nel Batista
144  mutò 'l primo padrone; ond' ei per questo
142  Gather them up beneath the dismal bush;
143  I of that city was which to the Baptist
144  Changed its first patron, wherefore he for this
145  sempre con l'arte sua la farà trista;
146  e se non fosse che 'n sul passo d'Arno
147  rimane ancor di lui alcuna vista,
145  Forever with his art will make it sad.
146  And were it not that on the pass of Arno
147  Some glimpses of him are remaining still,
148  que' cittadin che poi la rifondarno
149  sovra 'l cener che d'Attila rimase,
150  avrebber fatto lavorare indarno.
148  Those citizens, who afterwards rebuilt it
149  Upon the ashes left by Attila,
150  In vain had caused their labour to be done.
151  Io fei gibetto a me de le mie case.”
151  Of my own house I made myself a gibbet."

Canto XIV
The general tone of the Commedia is anything but humorous, and yet humor sneaks in in the form of irony, and this opening three lines is a fine example.  When Dante says that the charity of his native place, Florence, compels him  to act  charitably, we must remember that Florence by the time this was written had already betrayed and exiled him.   And yet, this poetic conceit that the action is taking place over Easter weekend of the year 1300 makes this irony possible.  The character Dante in the poem cannot know that this statement is ironic, because he had yet to be betrayed.  This opening also serves as a link to the previous canto, so that we see that Dante the poet is covering up the seams that stitch one section to another — so masterful.

Now we come to a desert sweltering under a slow rain of falling fire, brilliantly compared to large flakes of snow falling in the Alps in a windless storm, this metaphor combining high and low, earth and hell, heat and cold so that the reader's attention in a few lines has to traverse an immense mindscape of extremes, and then there is the historical reference to Cato.    Holland's commetary referencing Mazzota provides the pertinant background on this reference:

That Dante should refer here to Cato the Younger, who committed suicide at Utica (when further opposition by the republican forces led by him against Julius Caesar's army seemed futile) seems to invite a negative judgment on him. Cato, however, will be presented in Purgatorio I and II, in an authorial decision that still baffles commentators, as one of the saved. To refer to him here, a few verses from the wood of the suicides – where Christian readers might normally assume that Cato should be punished – given Dante's plan eventually to reveal his salvation, was a chancy choice for him to have made.
 
The poet is translating a line from Lucan's Pharsalia describing Cato's heroic decision to lead the remnant of dead Pompey's republican forces across the barren sands of Lybia in an attempt to escape from Caesar, and to do so, not carried by slaves, as Roman generals were wont to be transported, but on foot himself: 'primusque gradus in pulvere ponam' (and I, first among them, shall set my feet upon the sand [Phars. IX.395 – the citation was perhaps first noted by Daniello, comm. to XIV.13-15]). For a treatment of Cato in the context of canto XIV, see Giuseppe Mazzotta, Dante, Poet of the Desert (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979), pp. 47-65.
 
Dante thus reads Cato's suicide as something other, an act resembling Christ's sacrifice of Himself so that others may be free (for discussion see Hollander, Allegory in Dante's “Commedia” [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969], pp. 123-31). Now such a view may seem blasphemous (a fitting thought when we turn back, from the opening cantos of Purgatorio, to this passage in the canto of blasphemy), and has caused extraordinary exertion on the part of commentators to 'allegorize' the saved Cato we find in Purgatorio and turn him into an abstract quality rather than an historical being. Dante's text will not permit us such luxury of avoidance. His Cato, a Christian through a process that no one can understand, is saved.

Some of the sinners here lie supine on the burning earth, some sit huddled in groups, some run around.  Those lying down cry the loudest, they are the blasphemers who cursed God, and we shall shortly come upon one of these.  Those bunched in groups are the usurers.  Those running about are the sodomites.  None of these facts are clear to the reader at first glance, but are made clear by paying close attention to previous and subsequent passages of the poem.  The utter sterility of the landscape mirrors the utter sterility of these three sins.  Blasphemy cutting the sinner off from his relationship with the whole of creation, usury providing wealth without art or industry, and sodomy being a form of sexuality which cannot lead to offspring.  Some nice evocative details here — the sinners who are running about go round (interno line 25) reiterating the going round shape of Hell itself, and the dance of hands referenced in line 40 is also a compelling image as the sinners try to beat out the flames that are falling on their bodies.  This dance reference is very specific, the tresca referred to in this line was performed with a leader who touched some part of his body, and then all the other dancers imitated him, the dance proceeding at greater and greater speed as the dancers touch different parts of their bodies in ever accelerating motions.  Also, the blasphemers, lying on the ground, struck lowest so to speak, cry loudest, presumably because their sin was committed with the voice, and so now their own voices torment them.  Recalling this last detail is important if we are to understand the rich irony of the protagonists' meeting with the chief blasphemer here: Capaneus.

The entire Capaneus section of this Canto is an another example of Dante's subtle and power and insight into human psychology.  Capaneus was one of the seven kings who besieged Thebes, who defied Jove, and was destroyed by one of the God's thunderbolts.  His arrogance is ironic, in that he shouts at the Jove from the city's walls that the god will have to cry to Hephaestus to make him more thunderbolts because his enemy has exhausted his own supply.  What's ironic is that far from being atop the city's walls, now he is down in hell, supine, and at God's mercy.  Also, it has not taken bushels of thunderbolts to subdue him, but only one.  Like all the sinners in Hell, he has learned nothing from his ordeals but continues to arrogantly blaspheme, just as before.  That is Capaneus, but what about the reactions of Virgil and Dante?  Virgil is angrier at Capaneus than he has been or will be with any other sinner.  Why?  My speculations are as follows: The god that Capaneus defied was Virgil's pagan god.  Capaneus betrayed his city, and in situation mirrored Virgil's as a citizen of Troy, another city which was besieged.  The situation also mirrors what the protagonists encountered when approaching the City of Dis, where Virgil failed to gain access, an episode that the aspirant, Dante, slyly reminds his master of, in a subtle act of defiance, the student's questioning of the master being a kind of blasphemy in itself.  In this later case, Virgil's anger towards Capaneus is also a sort of passive-aggressive demonstration to his protege to get in line.  The reader, in effect, is watching a series of lifting screens, each of which allows for more insight into the situation.  Virgil makes a very telling comment about Capaneus' punishment, viz., that it comes not so much from God, but is continually fueled by his own anger, which is a very explicit reference to all the sinners in Hell: they are the authors of their own torments.

After the episode with Capaneus, we come to the great allegory of the statue inside the mountain in ancient Crete, whose tears form the rivers of Hell.  This allegory is too complicated for any explication that could be given here.  Giuseppe Mazzotta does that job in his book: Dante, Poet of the Desert.  But a couple of things stand out: The statue is an image of time, specifically historical time: The statue's golden head the earliest prelapsarian condition of civilization, proceeding down through the body to iron legs and clay feet.  Time, like water, or tears, flows down in history and in mortal life, and yet in the imagination, i.e., the devotional life, it could flow (spiral) up, like vapors, to immortality.  It's such a fine, profound image.  Another word that catches the attentive reader's eye is in line 96: casto, chaste.  Chaste here is not just sexual, it is the prelapsarian condition of innocence, the time in human life when the culture or the individual has not yet realized that incarnation must lead to dissolution, suffering and death, all of which conditions unfold and time, and cannot exist in eternity.    

1  Poi che la carità del natio loco
2  mi strinse, raunai le fronde sparte
3  e rende'le a colui, ch'era già fioco.
1  Because the charity of my native place
2  Constrained me, gathered I the scattered leaves,
3  And gave them back to him, who now was hoarse.
4  Indi venimmo al fine ove si parte
5  lo secondo giron dal terzo, e dove
6  si vede di giustizia orribil arte.
4  Then came we to the confine, where disparted
5  The second round is from the third, and where
6  A horrible form of Justice is beheld.
7  A ben manifestar le cose nove,
8  dico che arrivammo ad una landa
9  che dal suo letto ogne pianta rimove.
7  Clearly to manifest these novel things,
8  I say that we arrived upon a plain,
9  Which from its bed rejecteth every plant;
10  La dolorosa selva l'è ghirlanda
11  intorno, come 'l fosso tristo ad essa;
12  quivi fermammo i passi a randa a randa.
10  The dolorous forest is a garland to it
11  All round about, as the sad moat to that;
12  There close upon the edge we stayed our feet.
13  Lo spazzo era una rena arida e spessa,
14  non d'altra foggia fatta che colei
15  che fu da' piè di Caton già soppressa.
13  The soil was of an arid and thick sand,
14  Not of another fashion made than that
15  Which by the feet of Cato once was pressed.
16  O vendetta di Dio, quanto tu dei
17  esser temuta da ciascun che legge
18  ciò che fu manifesto a li occhi mei!
16  Vengeance of God, O how much oughtest thou
17  By each one to be dreaded, who doth read
18  That which was manifest unto mine eyes!
19  D'anime nude vidi molte gregge
20  che piangean tutte assai miseramente,
21  e parea posta lor diversa legge.
19  Of naked souls beheld I many herds,
20  Who all were weeping very miserably,
21  And over them seemed set a law diverse.
22  Supin giacea in terra alcuna gente,
23  alcuna si sedea tutta raccolta,
24  e altra andava continüamente.
22  Supine upon the ground some folk were lying;
23  And some were sitting all drawn up together,
24  And others went about continually.
25  Quella che giva 'ntorno era più molta,
26  e quella men che giacëa al tormento,
27  ma più al duolo avea la lingua sciolta.
25  Those who were going round were far the more,
26  And those were less who lay down to their torment,
27  But had their tongues more loosed to lamentation.
28  Sovra tutto 'l sabbion, d'un cader lento,
29  piovean di foco dilatate falde,
30  come di neve in alpe sanza vento.
28  O'er all the sand-waste, with a gradual fall,
29  Were raining down dilated flakes of fire,
30  As of the snow on Alp without a wind.
31  Quali Alessandro in quelle parti calde
32  d'Indïa vide sopra 'l süo stuolo
33  fiamme cadere infino a terra salde,
31  As Alexander, in those torrid parts
32  Of India, beheld upon his host
33  Flames fall unbroken till they reached the ground.
34  per ch'ei provide a scalpitar lo suolo
35  con le sue schiere, acciò che lo vapore
36  mei si stingueva mentre ch'era solo:
34  Whence he provided with his phalanxes
35  To trample down the soil, because the vapour
36  Better extinguished was while it was single;
37  tale scendeva l'etternale ardore;
38  onde la rena s'accendea, com' esca
39  sotto focile, a doppiar lo dolore.
37  Thus was descending the eternal heat,
38  Whereby the sand was set on fire, like tinder
39  Beneath the steel, for doubling of the dole.
40  Sanza riposo mai era la tresca
41  de le misere mani, or quindi or quinci
42  escotendo da sé l'arsura fresca.
40  Without repose forever was the dance
41  Of miserable hands, now there, now here,
42  Shaking away from off them the fresh gleeds.
43  I' cominciai: “Maestro, tu che vinci
44  tutte le cose, fuor che ' demon duri
45  ch'a l'intrar de la porta incontra uscinci,
43  "Master," began I, "thou who overcomest
44  All things except the demons dire, that issued
45  Against us at the entrance of the gate,
46  chi è quel grande che non par che curi
47  lo 'ncendio e giace dispettoso e torto,
48  sì che la pioggia non par che 'l maturi?”
46  Who is that mighty one who seems to heed not
47  The fire, and lieth lowering and disdainful,
48  So that the rain seems not to ripen him?"
49  E quel medesmo, che si fu accorto
50  ch'io domandava il mio duca di lui,
51  gridò: “Qual io fui vivo, tal son morto.
49  And he himself, who had become aware
50  That I was questioning my Guide about him,
51  Cried: "Such as I was living, am I, dead.
52  Se Giove stanchi 'l suo fabbro da cui
53  crucciato prese la folgore aguta
54  onde l'ultimo dì percosso fui;
52  If Jove should weary out his smith, from whom
53  He seized in anger the sharp thunderbolt,
54  Wherewith upon the last day I was smitten,
55  o s'elli stanchi li altri a muta a muta
56  in Mongibello a la focina negra,
57  chiamando 'Buon Vulcano, aiuta, aiuta!'
55  And if he wearied out by turns the others
56  In Mongibello at the swarthy forge,
57  Vociferating, 'Help, good Vulcan, help!'
58  sì com' el fece a la pugna di Flegra,
59  e me saetti con tutta sua forza:
60  non ne potrebbe aver vendetta allegra.”
58  Even as he did there at the fight of Phlegra,
59  And shot his bolts at me with all his might,
60  He would not have thereby a joyous vengeance."
61  Allora il duca mio parlò di forza
62  tanto, ch'i' non l'avea si forte udito:
63  “O Capaneo, in ciò che non s'ammorza
61  Then did my Leader speak with such great force,
62  That I had never heard him speak so loud:
63  "O Capaneus, in that is not extinguished
64  la tua superbia, se' tu più punito;
65  nullo martiro, fuor che la tua rabbia,
66  sarebbe al tuo furor dolor compito.”
64  Thine arrogance, thou punished art the more;
65  Not any torment, saving thine own rage,
66  Would be unto thy fury pain complete."
67  Poi si rivolse a me con miglior labbia,
68  dicendo: “Quei fu l'un d'i sette regi
69  ch'assiser Tebe; ed ebbe e par ch'elli abbia
67  Then he turned round to me with better lip,
68  Saying: "One of the Seven Kings was he
69  Who Thebes besieged, and held, and seems to hold
70  Dio in disdegno, e poco par che 'l pregi;
71  ma, com' io dissi lui, li suoi dispetti
72  sono al suo petto assai debiti fregi.
70  God in disdain, and little seems to prize him;
71  But, as I said to him, his own despites
72  Are for his breast the fittest ornaments.
73  Or mi vien dietro, e guarda che non metti,
74  ancor, li piedi ne la rena arsiccia;
75  ma sempre al bosco tien li piedi stretti.”
73  Now follow me, and mind thou do not place
74  As yet thy feet upon the burning sand,
75  But always keep them close unto the wood."
76  Tacendo divenimmo là 've spiccia
77  fuor de la selva un picciol fiumicello,
78  lo cui rossore ancor mi raccapriccia.
76  Speaking no word, we came to where there gushes
77  Forth from the wood a little rivulet,
78  Whose redness makes my hair still stand on end.
79  Quale del Bulicame esce ruscello
80  che parton poi tra lor le peccatrici,
81  tal per la rena giù sen giva quello.
79  As from the Bulicame springs the brooklet,
80  The sinful women later share among them,
81  So downward through the sand it went its way.
82  Lo fondo suo e ambo le pendici
83  fatt' era 'n pietra, e ' margini da lato;
84  per ch'io m'accorsi che 'l passo era lici.
82  The bottom of it, and both sloping banks,
83  Were made of stone, and the margins at the side;
84  Whence I perceived that there the passage was.
85  “Tra tutto l'altro ch'i' t'ho dimostrato,
86  poscia che noi intrammo per la porta
87  lo cui sogliare a nessuno è negato,
85  "In all the rest which I have shown to thee
86  Since we have entered in within the gate
87  Whose threshold unto no one is denied,
88  cosa non fu da li tuoi occhi scorta
89  notabile com' è 'l presente rio,
90  che sovra sé tutte fiammelle ammorta.”
88  Nothing has been discovered by thine eyes
89  So notable as is the present river,
90  Which all the little flames above it quenches."
91  Queste parole fuor del duca mio;
92  per ch'io 'l pregai che mi largisse 'l pasto
93  di cui largito m'avëa il disio.
91  These words were of my Leader; whence I prayed him
92  That he would give me largess of the food,
93  For which he had given me largess of desire.
94  “In mezzo mar siede un paese guasto,”
95  diss' elli allora, “che s'appella Creta,
96  sotto 'l cui rege fu già 'l mondo casto.
94  "In the mid-sea there sits a wasted land,"
95  Said he thereafterward, "whose name is Crete,
96  Under whose king the world of old was chaste.
97  Una montagna v'è che già fu lieta
98  d'acqua e di fronde, che si chiamò Ida;
99  or è diserta come cosa vieta.
97  There is a mountain there, that once was glad
98  With waters and with leaves, which was called Ida;
99  Now 'tis deserted, as a thing worn out.
100  Rëa la scelse già per cuna fida
101  del suo figliuolo, e per celarlo meglio,
102  quando piangea, vi facea far le grida.
100  Rhea once chose it for the faithful cradle
101  Of her own son; and to conceal him better,
102  Whene'er he cried, she there had clamours made.
103  Dentro dal monte sta dritto un gran veglio,
104  che tien volte le spalle inver' Dammiata
105  e Roma guarda come süo speglio.
103  A grand old man stands in the mount erect,
104  Who holds his shoulders turned tow'rds Damietta,
105  And looks at Rome as if it were his mirror.
106  La sua testa è di fin oro formata,
107  e puro argento son le braccia e 'l petto,
108  poi è di rame infino a la forcata;
106  His head is fashioned of refined gold,
107  And of pure silver are the arms and breast;
108  hen he is brass as far down as the fork.
109  da indi in giuso è tutto ferro eletto,
110  salvo che 'l destro piede è terra cotta;
111  e sta 'n su quel, più che 'n su l'altro, eretto.
109  From that point downward all is chosen iron,
110  Save that the right foot is of kiln-baked clay,
111  And more he stands on that than on the other.

112  Ciascuna parte, fuor che l'oro, è rotta
113  d'una fessura che lagrime goccia,
114  le quali, accolte, fóran quella grotta.
112  Each part, except the gold, is by a fissure
113  Asunder cleft, that dripping is with tears,
114  Which gathered together perforate that cavern.
115  Lor corso in questa valle si diroccia;
116  fanno Acheronte, Stige e Flegetonta;
117  poi sen van giù per questa stretta doccia,
115  From rock to rock they fall into this valley;
116  Acheron, Styx, and Phlegethon they form;
117  Then downward go along this narrow sluice
118  infin, là ove più non si dismonta,
119  fanno Cocito; e qual sia quello stagno
120  tu lo vedrai, però qui non si conta.”
118  Unto that point where is no more descending.
119  They form Cocytus; what that pool may be
120  Thou shalt behold, so here 'tis not narrated."
121  E io a lui: “Se 'l presente rigagno
122  si diriva così dal nostro mondo,
123  perché ci appar pur a questo vivagno?”
121  And I to him: "If so the present runnel
122  Doth take its rise in this way from our world,
123  Why only on this verge appears it to us?"
124  Ed elli a me: “Tu sai che 'l loco è tondo;
125  e tutto che tu sie venuto molto,
126  pur a sinistra, giù calando al fondo,
124  And he to me: "Thou knowest the place is round,
125  And notwithstanding thou hast journeyed far,
126  Still to the left descending to the bottom,
127  non se' ancor per tutto 'l cerchio vòlto;
128  per che, se cosa n'apparisce nova,
129  non de' addur maraviglia al tuo volto.”
127  Thou hast not yet through all the circle turned.
128  Therefore if something new appear to us,
129  It should not bring amazement to thy face."
130  E io ancor: “Maestro, ove si trova
131  Flegetonta e Letè? ché de l'un taci,
132  e l'altro di' che si fa d'esta piova.”
130  And I again: "Master, where shall be found
131  Lethe and Phlegethon, for of one thou'rt silent,
132  And sayest the other of this rain is made?"
133  “In tutte tue question certo mi piaci,”
134  rispuose, “ma 'l bollor de l'acqua rossa
135  dovea ben solver l'una che tu faci.
133  "In all thy questions truly thou dost please me,"
134  Replied he; "but the boiling of the red
135  Water might well solve one of them thou makest.
136  Letè vedrai, ma fuor di questa fossa,
137  là dove vanno l'anime a lavarsi
138  quando la colpa pentuta è rimossa.”
136  Thou shalt see Lethe, but outside this moat,
137  There where the souls repair to lave themselves,
138  When sin repented of has been removed."
139  Poi disse: “Omai è tempo da scostarsi
140  dal bosco; fa che di retro a me vegne:
141  li margini fan via, che non son arsi,
139  Then said he: "It is time now to abandon
140  The wood; take heed that thou come after me;
141  A way the margins make that are not burning,
142  e sopra loro ogne vapor si spegne.”
142  And over them all vapours are extinguished."
Canto XV
Ambiguity, irony, doubling, highs and lows, trash and treasure, mistiness, back and forths, turns and turns about — these are the characteristics of this niche in Hell wherein Dante places the sodomites.  As has been typical of Dante to this point, Dante does not so much dwell on the whatever the sin of sodomy might be sexually, except through rather vague allusions, rather he dwells on the relational aspects of the issue.  This inevitably leads to an obsessional theme of his, that is to say: politics.  

What is sodomy really?  In terms of the temporal, mortal world, it is contra natura, not because of any kind of atypical sexual pleasure, but because it is sterile.  It is a sin against Go, because it violates his command: "Be fruitful and multiply."  And in that sense, it mirrors the fate of all the denizens of Hell, in that it is self-referential, instead of being relationtional.  The sodomites here, represented by Dante's old teacher, Brunetto Latinini, dashing aimlessly about on burning sands as fire falls on them, doomed to be always running as fast into danger as they run from it.  Consider the double description at the beginning: The dikes holding back the sea, and the dikes holding back floodwaters from melting snow. (high and low)  If we consider water a metaphor for the Freudian libido, then these devices are "against nature" too, just as any kind of sexual repression would be — heterosexual, homosexual, conjugal, adulterous, consensual or non-consensual.  The urge needs an outlet, and also an inlet, and the ambiguity, the irony, of these examples, is that they provide neither.  As Frost says: "Something there is that doesn't love a wall."  But this dike in Hell ironically is the only firm ground by which the protagonists can traverse — their trail always having an inlet and an outlet — this landscape, following the course of Phlegathon's blood river as it drops down.  Now let's just examine one small technical device, the text in lines 15, 33, 52, 53, 95, and 121 contains some reference to turning — turn and turn about, oscillating, yet unable to come to rest or to reconcile the unreconcilable rights and lefts, backs and forths, ups and downs of space itself.   Brunetto must be running towards the protagonists so that he can see their faces and they his, and he bids Dante to turn too, as Virgil goes on ahead (here is another instance, where the aspirant Dante, eschews Virgil's teaching, for that of this old teacher), but here, Virgil is not totally silent, in as much as he makes a kind of departing, over-the-right-shoulder comment, dripping with irony, as he points out the irony of Dante's response to Brunetto's prophesy of Dante's exile.  Dante compares his own fate to that of being turned on Fortuna's wheel (turning again), and says, however this turn goes, he accepts his fate.

Dante's insight is on every topic subtler than any serpent of the field, and as radiant as any beacon of hope, and this is no more true than here, in this Canto.  The aspirant here is clearly sympathetic to his old teacher, even reverential, and yet, he places him among the violent, who have sinned against God.  Yes, Brunetto's speech, as are the speeches of all in hell, is clearly self-serving, and not more so in those passages where he compares the interbreeding of the Florentinean ancestors with the clearly uncultured hillbilly Fesoleans (still smelling of granite for their mountain enclaves) with the more cultured Roman's — a subtle swipe at the dangers of indiscriminate heterosexual coupling.  One could read this as comparing homosexual sex as a form of erotic celibacy, in that it does not breed devils.  And in this case it veers very close to the heresy of the Cathars, which held in its most extreme examples, it is an evil world created by an evil demi-urge and should not be perpetuated through generation.  That alone, would be a sin of violence against Creation itself, not mere incontinence or even perversion.  And, Brunetto, clearly owes his alliegence, not to theology, but to high culture, to art, and this too would be enought to damn him — at least in any orthodox estimation.  But what does Dante, the author, think about homosexual.  Well, since homosexuals also appear later with saved in the Purgatorio, I think it's safe to say, Dante did not condemn homosexuality out of hand, so there must be some other burr under his saddle that has caused him to denigrate Brunetto to this degree.  What that burr is, it skills not to ask.  All of the aspirant's words are sympathetic to Brunetto, and yet Brunetto is placed below him as he walks atop the dike, and worse, Brunetto is harshly lampooned in the final image of the canto: turning tail and running naked literally after other naked "assholes" in the lease dignified way imaginable.  The mist that rises from the blood stream protects from the falling fire and yet is in itself horrifying, a mist that veils and distorts, and adds another dimension to Hell's torments: perpetual uncertaintly.  In the end — no pun intended — we don't know what to make of this eternal confusion, except to say, that the more we try to probe it, the more ambiguous and unsettling it becomes.       

1  Ora cen porta l'un de' duri margini;
2  e 'l fummo del ruscel di sopra aduggia,
3  sì che dal foco salva l'acqua e li argini.

1  Now bears us onward one of the hard margins,
2  And so the brooklet's mist o'ershadows it,
3  From fire it saves the water and the dikes.

4  Quali Fiamminghi tra Guizzante e Bruggia,
5  temendo 'l fiotto che 'nver' lor s'avventa;
6  fanno lo schermo perché 'l mar si fuggia;

4  Even as the Flemings, 'twixt Cadsand and Bruges,
5  Fearing the flood that tow'rds them hurls itself,
6  Their bulwarks build to put the sea to flight;

7  e quali Padoan lungo la Brenta,
8  per difender lor ville e lor castelli,
9  anzi che Carentana il caldo senta:

7  And as the Paduans along the Brenta,
8  To guard their villas and their villages,
9  Or ever Chiarentana feel the heat;

10  a tale imagine eran fatti quelli,
11  tutto che né sì alti né sì grossi,
12  qual che si fosse, lo maestro félli.

10  In such similitude had those been made,
11  Albeit not so lofty nor so thick,
12  Whoever he might be, the master made them.

13  Già eravam da la selva rimossi
14  tanto, ch'i' non avrei visto dov' era,
15  perch' io in dietro rivolto mi fossi,

13  Now were we from the forest so remote,
14  I could not have discovered where it was,
15  Even if backward I had turned myself,

16  Quando incontrammo d'anime una schiera
17  che venian lungo l'argine, e ciascuna
18  ci riguardava come suol da sera

16  When we a company of souls encountered,
17  Who came beside the dike, and every one
18  Gazed at us, as at evening we are wont

19  guardare uno altro sotto nuova luna;
20  e sì ver' noi aguzzavan le ciglia
21  come 'l vecchio sartor fa ne la cruna.

19  To eye each other under a new moon,
20  And so towards us sharpened they their brows
21  As an old tailor at the needle's eye.

22  Così adocchiato da cotal famiglia,
23  fui conosciuto da un, che mi prese
24  per lo lembo e gridò: “Qual maraviglia!”

22  Thus scrutinised by such a family,
23  By some one I was recognised, who seized
24  My garment's hem, and cried out, "What a marvel!"

25  E io, quando 'l suo braccio a me distese,
26  ficcaï li occhi per lo cotto aspetto,
27  sì che 'l viso abbrusciato non difese

25  And I, when he stretched forth his arm to me,
26  On his baked aspect fastened so mine eyes,
27  That the scorched countenance prevented not

28  la conoscenza süa al mio 'ntelletto;
29  e chinando la mano a la sua faccia,
30  rispuosi: “Siete voi qui, ser Brunetto?”

28  His recognition by my intellect;
29  And bowing down my face unto his own,
30  I made reply, "Are you here, Ser Brunetto?"

31  E quelli: “O figliuol mio, non ti dispiaccia
32  se Brunetto Latino un poco teco
33  ritorna 'n dietro e lascia andar la traccia.”

31  And he: "May't not displease thee, O my son,
32  If a brief space with thee Brunetto Latini
33  Backward return and let the trail go on."

34  I' dissi lui: “Quanto posso, ven preco;
35  e se volete che con voi m'asseggia,
36  faròl, se piace a costui che vo seco.”

34  I said to him: "With all my power I ask it;
35  And if you wish me to sit down with you,
36  I will, if he please, for I go with him."

37  “O figliuol,” disse, “qual di questa greggia
38  s'arresta punto, giace poi cent' anni
39  sanz' arrostarsi quando 'l foco il feggia.

37  "O son," he said, "whoever of this herd
38  A moment stops, lies then a hundred years,
39  Nor fans himself when smiteth him the fire.

40  Però va oltre: i' ti verrò a' panni;
41  e poi rigiugnerò la mia masnada,
42  che va piangendo i suoi etterni danni.”

40  Therefore go on; I at thy skirts will come,
41  And afterward will I rejoin my band,
42  Which goes lamenting its eternal doom."

43  Io non osava scender de la strada
44  per andar par di lui; ma 'l capo chino
45  tenea com' uom che reverente vada.

43  I did not dare to go down from the road
44  Level to walk with him; but my head bowed
45  I held as one who goeth reverently.

46  El cominciò: “Qual fortuna o destino
47  anzi l'ultimo dì qua giù ti mena?
48  e chi è questi che mostra 'l cammino?”

46  And he began: "What fortune or what fate
47  Before the last day leadeth thee down here?
48  And who is this that showeth thee the way?"

49  “Là sù di sopra, in la vita serena,”
50  rispuos' io lui, “mi smarri' in una valle,
51  avanti che l'età mia fosse piena.

49  "Up there above us in the life serene,"
50  I answered him, "I lost me in a valley,
51  Or ever yet my age had been completed.

52  Pur ier mattina le volsi le spalle:
53  questi m'apparve, tornand'ïo in quella,
54  e reducemi a ca per questo calle.”

52  But yestermorn I turned my back upon it;
53  This one appeared to me, returning thither,
54  And homeward leadeth me along this road."

55  Ed elli a me: “Se tu segui tua stella,
56  non puoi fallire a glorïoso porto,
57  se ben m'accorsi ne la vita bella;

55  And he to me: "If thou thy star do follow,
56  Thou canst not fail thee of a glorious port,
57  If well I judged in the life beautiful.

58  e s'io non fossi sì per tempo morto,
59  veggendo il cielo a te così benigno,
60  dato t'avrei a l'opera conforto.

58  And if I had not died so prematurely,
59  Seeing Heaven thus benignant unto thee,
60  I would have given thee comfort in the work.

61  Ma quello ingrato popolo maligno
62  che discese di Fiesole ab antico,
63  e tiene ancor del monte e del macigno,

61  But that ungrateful and malignant people,
62  Which of old time from Fesole descended,
63  And smacks still of the mountain and the granite,

64  ti si farà, per tuo ben far, nimico;
65  ed è ragion, ché tra li lazzi sorbi
66  si disconvien fruttare al dolce fico.

64  Will make itself, for thy good deeds, thy foe;
65  And it is right; for among crabbed sorbs
66  It ill befits the sweet fig to bear fruit.

67  Vecchia fama nel mondo li chiama orbi;
68  gent' è avara, invidiosa e superba:
69  dai lor costumi fa che tu ti forbi.

67  Old rumour in the world proclaims them blind;
68  A people avaricious, envious, proud;
69  Take heed that of their customs thou do cleanse thee.

70  La tua fortuna tanto onor ti serba,
71  che l'una parte e l'altra avranno fame
72  di te; ma lungi fia dal becco l'erba.

70  Thy fortune so much honour doth reserve thee,
71  One party and the other shall be hungry
72  For thee; but far from goat shall be the grass.
 
73  Faccian le bestie fiesolane strame
74  di lor medesme, e non tocchin la pianta,
75  s'alcuna surge ancora in lor letame,

73  Their litter let the beasts of Fesole
74  Make of themselves, nor let them touch the plant,
75  If any still upon their dunghill rise,

76  in cui riviva la sementa santa
77  di que' Roman che vi rimaser quando
78  fu fatto il nido di malizia tanta.”

76  In which may yet revive the consecrated
77  Seed of those Romans, who remained there when
78  The nest of such great malice it became."

79  “Se fosse tutto pieno il mio dimando,”
80  rispuos' io lui, “voi non sareste ancora
81  de l'umana natura posto in bando;

79  "If my entreaty wholly were fulfilled,"
80  Replied I to him, "not yet would you be
81  In banishment from human nature placed;

82  ché 'n la mente m'è fitta, e or m'accora,
83  la cara e buona imagine paterna
84  di voi quando nel mondo ad ora ad ora

82  For in my mind is fixed, and touches now
83  My heart the dear and good paternal image
84  Of you, when in the world from hour to hour

85  m'insegnavate come l'uom s'etterna:
86  e quant' io l'abbia in grado, mentr' io vivo
87  convien che ne la mia lingua si scerna.

85  You taught me how a man becomes eternal;
86  And how much I am grateful, while I live
87  Behoves that in my language be discerned.

88  Ciò che narrate di mio corso scrivo,
89  e serbolo a chiosar con altro testo
90  a donna che saprà, s'a lei arrivo.

88  What you narrate of my career I write,
89  And keep it to be glossed with other text
90  By a Lady who can do it, if I reach her.

91  Tanto vogl' io che vi sia manifesto,
92  pur che mia coscïenza non mi garra,
93  ch'a la Fortuna, come vuol, son presto.

91  This much will I have manifest to you;
92  Provided that my conscience do not chide me,
93  For whatsoever Fortune I am ready.

94  Non è nuova a li orecchi miei tal arra:
95  però giri Fortuna la sua rota
96  come le piace, e 'l villan la sua marra.”

94  Such handsel is not new unto mine ears;
95  Therefore let Fortune turn her wheel around
96  As it may please her, and the churl his mattock."

97  Lo mio maestro allora in su la gota
98  destra si volse in dietro e riguardommi;
99  poi disse: “Bene ascolta chi la nota.”

97  My Master thereupon on his right cheek
98  Did backward turn himself, and looked at me;
99  Then said: "He listeneth well who noteth it."

100  Né per tanto di men parlando vommi
101  con ser Brunetto, e dimando chi sono
102  li suoi compagni più noti e più sommi.

100  Nor speaking less on that account, I go
101  With Ser Brunetto, and I ask who are
102  His most known and most eminent companions.

103  Ed elli a me: “Saper d'alcuno è buono;
104  de li altri fia laudabile tacerci,
105  ché 'l tempo saria corto a tanto suono.

103  And he to me: "To know of some is well;
104  Of others it were laudable to be silent,
105  For short would be the time for so much speech.

106  In somma sappi che tutti fur cherci
107  e litterati grandi e di gran fama,
108  d'un peccato medesmo al mondo lerci.

106  Know them in sum, that all of them were clerks,
107  And men of letters great and of great fame,
108  In the world tainted with the selfsame sin.

109  Priscian sen va con quella turba grama,
110  e Francesco d'Accorso anche; e vedervi,
111  s'avessi avuto di tal tigna brama,

109  Priscian goes yonder with that wretched crowd,
110  And Francis of Accorso; and thou hadst seen there
111  If thou hadst had a hankering for such scurf,

112  colui potei che dal servo de' servi
113  fu trasmutato d'Arno in Bacchiglione,
114  dove lasciò li mal protesi nervi.

112  That one, who by the Servant of the Servants
113  From Arno was transferred to Bacchiglione,
114  Where he has left his sin-excited nerves.

115  Di più direi; ma 'l venire e 'l sermone
116  più lungo esser non può, però ch'i' veggio
117  là surger nuovo fummo del sabbione.

115  More would I say, but coming and discoursing
116  Can be no longer; for that I behold
117  New smoke uprising yonder from the sand.

118  Gente vien con la quale esser non deggio.
119  Sieti raccomandato il mio Tesoro,
120  nel qual io vivo ancora, e più non cheggio.”

118  A people comes with whom I may not be;
119  Commended unto thee be my Tesoro,
120  In which I still live, and no more I ask."

121  Poi si rivolse e parve di coloro
122  che corrono a Verona il drappo verde
123  per la campagna; e parve di costoro

121  Then he turned round, and seemed to be of those
122  Who at Verona run for the Green Mantle
123  Across the plain; and seemed to be among them

124  quelli che vince, non colui che perde.

124  The one who wins, and not the one who loses.

Canto XVI
Can there be a vice that does no harm to others, or a virtue that does not do its bearer any good?  The fate of the three sinners featured here, seem to prompt that question.  

These two cantos wherein the sodomites are punished are swollen with ambiguity.  Here, the damned are courteously treated by the protagonist, especially here in Canto XVI, where the Virgil specifically tells the aspirant, Dante, to be courteous, and thereafter follows an interchange which stylistically bear the marks of a medieval manual on courtesy.  The whole canto is very stylized, in fact, with the framing of the waterfall (we are immediately directed to listen, and one almost thinks that this is a metaphoric pre-echo of the Shakespearean phrase "full of sound and fury and signifying nothing."  Everything here is marching in place, the three sodomites, required to keep moving, circle like wrestlers looking for an opening, but both they and the protagonists are literally going nowhere.  (Compare this kind of "looking" to the "looking" in the previous canto, where Brunetto's gaze is compared to those who search furtively under a dark new-moon shroud.  Dante is careful with observations like this, and maybe that other metaphor of the tailor threading a needle is an image of Dante himself is trying to do hear, carefully treading the edge of heresy, as he praises the characters of the damned.

To me the whole canto has the formality of a Masque, the sinners moving in a wheel, and speaking in unison.  But surely this formality is a mask, to use a phoneme, in the sense that it covers a monstrous reality.  The description of the wounds of the sinners gives us a glimpse of the pain and terror of this reality.  Surely these shades have committed some enormity in their lives, which cannot bear being directly talked about.  Brunetto's, the effeminate scholar and teacher, becomes in the end and object of ridicule.  But not these three.  They are spoken about as heroes of a lost cause ...     
  
Suddenly I realized that the sodomy that counts here is not sexual, but political: it is the inversion of one party or another championing its own cause while destroying the integrity of the whole.

The last image of the canto, the signal of the belt recalling the panther in Canto I, something coiled, uncoiling, like a fishline, which fetches forth the monster Geryon from the abyss.  And what an image Dante leaves us with: A monster with wings pumping his legs like a swimmer laboring towards the surface!  Only there is no surface here, we are in Hell, a kind of enclosed womb of a fetus that can neither be born or aborted.

1  Già era in loco onde s'udia 'l rimbombo
2  de l'acqua che cadea ne l'altro giro,
3  simile a quel che l'arnie fanno rombo,

1  Now was I where was heard the reverberation
2  Of water falling into the next round,
3  Like to that humming which the beehives make,

4  quando tre ombre insieme si partiro,
5  correndo, d'una torma che passava
6  sotto la pioggia de l'aspro martiro.

4  When shadows three together started forth,
5  Running, from out a company that passed
6  Beneath the rain of the sharp martyrdom.

7  Venian ver' noi, e ciascuna gridava:
8  “Sòstati tu ch'a l'abito ne sembri
9  essere alcun di nostra terra prava.”

7  Towards us came they, and each one cried out:
8  "Stop, thou; for by thy garb to us thou seemest
9  To be some one of our depraved city."

10  Ahimè, che piaghe vidi ne' lor membri,
11  ricenti e vecchie, da le fiamme incese!
12  Ancor men duol pur ch'i' me ne rimembri.

10  Ah me! what wounds I saw upon their limbs,
11  Recent and ancient by the flames burnt in!
12  It pains me still but to remember it.

13  A le lor grida il mio dottor s'attese;
14  volse 'l viso ver' me, e “Or aspetta,”
15  disse, “a costor si vuole esser cortese.

13  Unto their cries my Teacher paused attentive;
14  He turned his face towards me, and "Now wait,"
15  He said; "to these we should be courteous.

16 E se non fosse il foco che saetta
17  la natura del loco, i' dicerei
18  che meglio stesse a te che a lor la fretta.”

16  And if it were not for the fire that darts
17  The nature of this region, I should say
18  That haste were more becoming thee than them."

19  Ricominciar, come noi restammo, ei
20  l'antico verso; e quando a noi fuor giunti,
21  enno una rota di sé tutti e trei.

19  As soon as we stood still, they recommenced
20  The old refrain, and when they overtook us,
21  Formed of themselves a wheel, all three of them.

22  Qual sogliono i campion far nudi e unti,
23  avvisando lor presa e lor vantaggio,
24  prima che sien tra lor battuti e punti,

22  As champions stripped and oiled are wont to do,
23  Watching for their advantage and their hold,
24  Before they come to blows and thrusts between them,

25  così rotando, ciascuno il visaggio
26  drizzava a me, sì che 'n contraro il collo
27  faceva ai piè continüo vïaggio.

25  Thus, wheeling round, did every one his visage
26  Direct to me, so that in opposite wise
27  His neck and feet continual journey made.

28  E “Se miseria d'esto loco sollo
29  rende in dispetto noi e nostri prieghi,”
30  cominciò l'uno, “e 'l tinto aspetto e brollo,

28  And, "If the misery of this soft place
29  Bring in disdain ourselves and our entreaties,"
30  Began one, "and our aspect black and blistered,

31  la fama nostra il tuo animo pieghi
32  a dirne chi tu se', che i vivi piedi
33  così sicuro per lo 'nferno freghi.

31  Let the renown of us thy mind incline
32  To tell us who thou art, who thus securely
33  Thy living feet dost move along through Hell.

34  Questi, l'orme di cui pestar mi vedi,
35  tutto che nudo e dipelato vada,
36  fu di grado maggior che tu non credi:

34  He in whose footprints thou dost see me treading,
35  Naked and skinless though he now may go,
36  Was of a greater rank than thou dost think;

37  nepote fu de la buona Gualdrada;
38  Guido Guerra ebbe nome, e in sua vita
39  fece col senno assai e con la spada.

37  He was the grandson of the good Gualdrada;
38  His name was Guidoguerra, and in life
39  Much did he with his wisdom and his sword.

40  L'altro, ch'appresso me la rena trita,
41  è Tegghiaio Aldobrandi, la cui voce
42  nel mondo sù dovria esser gradita.

40  The other, who close by me treads the sand,
41  Tegghiaio Aldobrandi is, whose fame
42  Above there in the world should welcome be.

43  E io, che posto son con loro in croce,
44  Iacopo Rusticucci fui, e certo
45  la fiera moglie più ch'altro mi nuoce.”

43  And I, who with them on the cross am placed,
44  Jacopo Rusticucci was; and truly
45  My savage wife, more than aught else, doth harm me."

46  S'i' fossi stato dal foco coperto,
47  gittato mi sarei tra lor di sotto,
48  e credo che 'l dottor l'avria sofferto;

46  Could I have been protected from the fire,
47  Below I should have thrown myself among them,
48  And think the Teacher would have suffered it;

49  ma perch' io mi sarei brusciato e cotto,
50  vinse paura la mia buona voglia
51  che di loro abbracciar mi facea ghiotto.

49  But as I should have burned and baked myself,
50  My terror overmastered my good will,
51  Which made me greedy of embracing them.

52  Poi cominciai: “Non dispetto, ma doglia
53  la vostra condizion dentro mi fisse,
54  tanta che tardi tutta si dispoglia,

52  Then I began: "Sorrow and not disdain
53  Did your condition fix within me so,
54  That tardily it wholly is stripped off,

55  tosto che questo mio segnor mi disse
56  parole per le quali i' mi pensai
57  che qual voi siete, tal gente venisse.

55  As soon as this my Lord said unto me
56  Words, on account of which I thought within me
57  That people such as you are were approaching.

58  Di vostra terra sono, e sempre mai
59  l'ovra di voi e li onorati nomi
60  con affezion ritrassi e ascoltai.

58  I of your city am; and evermore
59  Your labours and your honourable names
60  I with affection have retraced and heard.

61  Lascio lo fele e vo per dolci pomi
62  promessi a me per lo verace duca;
63  ma 'nfino al centro pria convien ch'i' tomi.”

61  I leave the gall, and go for the sweet fruits
62  Promised to me by the veracious Leader;
63  But to the centre first I needs must plunge."

64  “Se lungamente l'anima conduca
65  le membra tue,” rispuose quelli ancora,
66  “e se la fama tua dopo te luca

64  "So may the soul for a long while conduct
65  Those limbs of thine," did he make answer then,
66  "And so may thy renown shine after thee,

67  cortesia e valor dì se dimora
68  ne la nostra città sì come suole,
69  o se del tutto se n'è gita fora;

67  Valour and courtesy, say if they dwell
68  Within our city, as they used to do,
69  Or if they wholly have gone out of it;

70  ché Guiglielmo Borsiere, il qual si duole
71  con noi per poco e va là coi compagni,
72  assai ne cruccia con le sue parole.”

70  For Guglielmo Borsier, who is in torment
71  With us of late, and goes there with his comrades,
72  Doth greatly mortify us with his words."

73  “La gente nuova e i sùbiti guadagni
74  orgoglio e dismisura han generata,
75  Fiorenza, in te, sì che tu già ten piagni.”

73  "The new inhabitants and the sudden gains,
74  Pride and extravagance have in thee engendered,
75  Florence, so that thou weep'st thereat already!"

76  Così gridai con la faccia levata;
77  e i tre, che ciò inteser per risposta,
78  guardar l'un l'altro com' al ver si guata.

76  In this wise I exclaimed with face uplifted;
77  And the three, taking that for my reply,
78  Looked at each other, as one looks at truth.

79  “Se l'altre volte sì poco ti costa,”
80  rispuoser tutti, “il satisfare altrui,
81  felice te se sì parli a tua posta!

79  "If other times so little it doth cost thee,"
80  Replied they all, "to satisfy another,
81  Happy art thou, thus speaking at thy will!

82  Però, se campi d'esti luoghi bui
83  e torni a riveder le belle stelle,
84  quando ti gioverà dicere 'I' fui,'

82  Therefore, if thou escape from these dark places,
83  And come to rebehold the beauteous stars,
84  When it shall pleasure thee to say, 'I was,'

85  fa che di noi a la gente favelle.”
86  Indi rupper la rota, e a fuggirsi
87  ali sembiar le gambe loro isnelle.

85  See that thou speak of us unto the people."
86  Then they broke up the wheel, and in their flight
87  It seemed as if their agile legs were wings.

88  Un amen non saria possuto dirsi
89  tosto così com' e' fuoro spariti;
90  per ch'al maestro parve di partirsi.

88  Not an Amen could possibly be said
89  So rapidly as they had disappeared;
90  Wherefore the Master deemed best to depart.

91  Io lo seguiva, e poco eravam iti,
92  che 'l suon de l'acqua n'era sì vicino,
93  che per parlar saremmo a pena uditi.

91  I followed him, and little had we gone,
92  Before the sound of water was so near us,
93  That speaking we should hardly have been heard.

94  Come quel fiume c'ha proprio cammino
95  prima dal Monte Viso 'nver' levante,
96  da la sinistra costa d'Apennino,

94  Even as that stream which holdeth its own course
95  The first from Monte Veso tow'rds the East,
96  Upon the left-hand slope of Apennine,

97  che si chiama Acquacheta suso, avante
98  che si divalli giù nel basso letto,
99  e a Forlì di quel nome è vacante,

97  Which is above called Acquacheta, ere
98  It down descendeth into its low bed,
99  And at Forli is vacant of that name,

100  rimbomba là sovra San Benedetto
101  de l'Alpe per cadere ad una scesa
102  ove dovea per mille esser recetto;

100  Reverberates there above San Benedetto
101  From Alps, by falling at a single leap,
102  Where for a thousand there were room enough;

103  così, giù d'una ripa discoscesa,
104  trovammo risonar quell' acqua tinta,
105  sì che 'n poc' ora avria l'orecchia offesa.

103  Thus downward from a bank precipitate,
104  We found resounding that dark-tinted water,
105  So that it soon the ear would have offended.

106  Io avea una corda intorno cinta,
107  e con essa pensai alcuna volta
108  prender la lonza a la pelle dipinta.

106  I had a cord around about me girt,
107  And therewithal I whilom had designed
108  To take the panther with the painted skin.

109  Poscia ch'io l'ebbi tutta da me sciolta,
110  sì come 'l duca m'avea comandato,
111  porsila a lui aggroppata e ravvolta.

109  After I this had all from me unloosed,
110  As my Conductor had commanded me,
111  I reached it to him, gathered up and coiled,

112  Ond' ei si volse inver' lo destro lato,
113  e alquanto di lunge da la sponda
114  la gittò giuso in quell' alto burrato.

112  Whereat he turned himself to the right side,
113  And at a little distance from the verge,
114  He cast it down into that deep abyss.

115  “E' pur convien che novità risponda,”
116  dicea fra me medesmo, “al novo cenno
117  che 'l maestro con l'occhio sì seconda.”

115  "It must needs be some novelty respond,"
116  I said within myself, "to the new signal
117  The Master with his eye is following so."

118  Ahi quanto cauti li uomini esser dienno
119  presso a color che non veggion pur l'ovra,
120  ma per entro i pensier miran col senno!

118  Ah me! how very cautious men should be
119  With those who not alone behold the act,
120  But with their wisdom look into the thoughts!

121  El disse a me: “Tosto verrà di sovra
122  ciò ch'io attendo e che il tuo pensier sogna;
123  tosto convien ch'al tuo viso si scovra.”

121  He said to me: "Soon there will upward come
122  What I await; and what thy thought is dreaming
123  Must soon reveal itself unto thy sight."

124  Sempre a quel ver c'ha faccia di menzogna
125  de' l'uom chiuder le labbra fin ch'el puote,
126  però che sanza colpa fa vergogna;

124  Aye to that truth which has the face of falsehood,
125  A man should close his lips as far as may be,
126  Because without his fault it causes shame;

127  ma qui tacer nol posso; e per le note
128  di questa comedìa, lettor, ti giuro,
129  s'elle non sien di lunga grazia vòte,

127  But here I cannot; and, Reader, by the notes
128  Of this my Comedy to thee I swear,
129  So may they not be void of lasting favour,

130  ch'i' vidi per quell' aere grosso e scuro
131  venir notando una figura in suso,
132  maravigliosa ad ogne cor sicuro,

130  Athwart that dense and darksome atmosphere
131  I saw a figure swimming upward come,
132  Marvellous unto every steadfast heart,

133  sì come torna colui che va giuso
134  talora a solver l'àncora ch'aggrappa
135  o scoglio o altro che nel mare è chiuso,

133  Even as he returns who goeth down
134  Sometimes to clear an anchor, which has grappled
135  Reef, or aught else that in the sea is hidden,

136  che 'n sù si stende e da piè si rattrappa.

136  Who upward stretches, and draws in his feet.

Canto XVII
Behold the monster with the pointed tail ... Behold him who infecteth all the world ... with this technical device Dante is not only parodying the Ecce Homo of the crucified Christ, but he is also telling his reader to read what is seen as well as what is heard.  He is introducing his great theme of Fraud, as a sort of faux beginning (like the faux codas in some of Haydn's symphonies) to a canto whose theme is the presentation of the usurers.  Geryon, another abhorrent mixture of creatures, is an emblem, a blazon, his very being like the heraldic blazons to be found on the purses of the usurers later in the canto.  As readers, we cannot trust the surfaces of what we see, but we can't ignore them either, and the double descriptions of the entire atmosphere, and the way the Geryon moves through it, shows a deep ambivalence: is this water?  is it air? does Geryon swim or fly?  Look at the description of Geryon — imagine di froda — the image of deceit — he has the trustworthy face of a human, but the body of serpent, whose tail carries a scorpion's sting.  The protagonists keep proceeding leftward, but they must move right for a while, keeping danger to their left, in order to continue.  And Geryon, like a boat both in and out of the water, his face visible, his tail lost in mist, is also a surface mass of barbaric, i.e. pagan, false, colors with an outward appearance of the unreadable symbols of wheels and shields, and when we come to Paradise, and see Beatrice's mystical magical car, perhaps we will remember this other diabolic vehicle of conveyance.  A savvy reader can find many such instances of ambiguity and deceit in the metaphors that teem from this monstrous vision of Geryon, many clustered around various permutations of the number three, another parody here, but this time of the Holy Trinity.

For the second time, Virgil leaves Dante alone, and so it is alone that Dante faces the usurers.  And if we have any doubt about how we should read the images the text presents, it should be erased by this vision of the usurers.  Using money to make money is the most sterile of enterprises, it thwarts, as commentators have pointed out, the essence of industry and the Godlike attribute of humans to transform soil and seed, for example, into food, or wood and stone, into habitations.  It is the ultimate form of idolatry, in which a complete abstraction is put in place of things of useful substance, and here we have these money lenders, these loan sharks, as we might now call them, staring at their purses, they themselves having lost all semblance of human form, their names unspoken, but their identities clearly apparent to those who can read the heraldic signs emblazoned on their purses.   The blazon with the lion is that of the Gianfighiazzi family, that of the Goose, the Ubriachi, and that of the boar, the Scrovegni.  These names mean little to us now, except that the persons which they represent, crouching in a hollow, are the hollowed-out effigies of those who worshipped the hollowed-out effigy of money.  They stare at their purses tied like grief magnets around their necks, drawing forth their tears.  They whack at their own faces like dogs in summer futilely using their paws to rid their muzzles of flies, gadflies and fleas (there is that number 3 again), and they lift themselves from their hot seat on their hands, sitting on their hands (like idlers) and yet industriously working like hell to keep their asses and faces from being burned, and getting nowhere in the bargain.  They still are burned, or should we say more burned, in spite of all their efforts to prevent it.  Unlike the three sodomites in the previous canto who spoke in unison, only one of these sinners speaks, an outsider even among outsiders, a Paduan among Florentines, and he denounces the living and the dead, and makes a crude gesture (like a child sticking out his tongue), as he licks his snout like an ox licking his own nostrils.  This gesture, apparently well known to Dante's 14th century audience, is something as vulgar as giving someone the finger.  If we had any sympathy for the sodomites, who were due courtesy at least, if not salvation, for these characters we can only feel disgust and the sense of aversion that goes with disgust.  I felt such revulsion that a part of me wished that their punishment might even be greater.  One recalls Ezra Pound's great denunciation of usury in his own Cantos.  There is enough fuel to feed even more flames of hatred in these sinners, but, like the aspirant, we can hardly wait to get away from these damned souls, without further interpretations, the simple reading of their blazons and gestures is enough.  And we proceed from them to one of the most remarkable descriptions in the cantos up to this point: The protagonists' ride on Geryon's shoulders to the deeper level of Hell containing fraud.

Dante's text in this final part of the canto is an astonishing act of imagination, an accurate description of what that wheeling descent must feel and look like to a man who could have had no experience of flying, and who, only by putting himself fully, almost bodily, into his own imaginative experience, could find accurate words to describe his sensations.  Here Dante, as one commentator puts it, invents the first helicopter, and of course the attentive reader (seer) will equate this wheeling descent of Geryon with the entire corkscrew shape and movement of Hell itself.  Thinking of this shape, one might compare the drawing of two spirals to the feeling tone of Hell.  If we start at the center dot of the spiral, and turn outward in every expanding circle, we open to eternity, but if we start on the outside, and wind our spiral to its central dot, our movements becomes ever more confined and constricted.  We reach what Blake called the place of complete contraction, which is Adam, or the strictly physical man, and of complete opacity, which is the evil Christians call Satan.  Understanding these two contrary movements, which trace the same path, one towards temporal condensation, death, and decay, and one towards the utter ephemeralizing of the body into eternal spirit, I finally begin to grasp what Saint Augustine meant by reason.  It is reasonable to move toward God on this spiraling journey, and unreasonable to move towards self and selfishness.  The ultimate usury and violence towards God is using this abstraction of money to as our raison d'etre — using  these tears in our little purse of skin, as our motivation, our motive power, when all that we would have to do is turn on the screw in the other direction, drop the temporal physical identity, and experience, as we move into wider, freer rings, the ultimately fulfilling experience of being not just in the cosmos, but of it. 

What someone once said of Augustine's Confessions can also be said of Dante's Commedia, namely, that the main fiction of the work is that it is not fiction, and this passage of the descent on the back of Geryon is so vivid that our incredulity seems but an ephemerality next to the visceral experience we share with the aspirant on this journey.  We begin to feel the power of spirit as a truth wherein we life more fully than we could every live as mere physical beings in a finite, incarnation, moving towards annihilation.  In this sense, the fiction that pretends to truth, becomes truth.        

1  “Ecco la fiera con la coda aguzza,
2  che passa i monti e rompe i muri e l'armi!
3  Ecco colei che tutto 'l mondo appuzza!”

1  "Behold the monster with the pointed tail,
2  Who cleaves the hills, and breaketh walls and weapons,
3  Behold him who infecteth all the world."

4  Sì cominciò lo mio duca a parlarmi;
5  e accennolle che venisse a proda,
6  vicino al fin d'i passeggiati marmi.

4  Thus unto me my Guide began to say,
5  And beckoned him that he should come to shore,
6  Near to the confine of the trodden marble;

7  E quella sozza imagine di froda
8  sen venne, e arrivò la testa e 'l busto,
9  ma 'n su la riva non trasse la coda.

7  And that uncleanly image of deceit
8  Came up and thrust ashore its head and bust,
9  But on the border did not drag its tail.

10  La faccia sua era faccia d'uom giusto,
11  tanto benigna avea di fuor la pelle,
12  e d'un serpente tutto l'altro fusto;

10  The face was as the face of a just man,
11  Its semblance outwardly was so benign,
12  And of a serpent all the trunk beside.

13  due branche avea pilose insin l'ascelle;
14  lo dosso e 'l petto e ambedue le coste
15  dipinti avea di nodi e di rotelle.

13  Two paws it had, hairy unto the armpits;
14  The back, and breast, and both the sides it had
15  Depicted o'er with nooses and with shields.

16  Con più color, sommesse e sovraposte
17  non fer mai drappi Tartari né Turchi,
18  né fuor tai tele per Aragne imposte.

16  With colours more, groundwork or broidery
17  Never in cloth did Tartars make nor Turks,
18  Nor were such tissues by Arachne laid.

19  Come talvolta stanno a riva i burchi,
20  che parte sono in acqua e parte in terra,
21  e come là tra li Tedeschi lurchi

19  As sometimes wherries lie upon the shore,
20  That part are in the water, part on land;
21  And as among the guzzling Germans there,

22  lo bivero s'assetta a far sua guerra,
23  così la fiera pessima si stava
24  su l'orlo ch'è di pietra e 'l sabbion serra.

22  The beaver plants himself to wage his war;
23  So that vile monster lay upon the border,
24  Which is of stone, and shutteth in the sand.

25  Nel vano tutta sua coda guizzava,
26  torcendo in sù la venenosa forca
27  ch'a guisa di scorpion la punta armava.

25  His tail was wholly quivering in the void,
26  Contorting upwards the envenomed fork,
27  That in the guise of scorpion armed its point.

28  Lo duca disse: “Or convien che si torca
29  la nostra via un poco insino a quella
30  bestia malvagia che colà si corca.”

28  The Guide said: "Now perforce must turn aside
29  Our way a little, even to that beast
30  Malevolent, that yonder coucheth him."

31  Però scendemmo a la destra mammella,
32  e diece passi femmo in su lo stremo,
33  per ben cessar la rena e la fiammella.

31  We therefore on the right side descended,
32  And made ten steps upon the outer verge,
33  Completely to avoid the sand and flame;

34  E quando noi a lei venuti semo,
35  poco più oltre veggio in su la rena
36  gente seder propinqua al loco scemo.

34  And after we are come to him, I see
35  A little farther off upon the sand
36  A people sitting near the hollow place.

37  Quivi 'l maestro “Acciò che tutta piena
38  esperienza d'esto giron porti,”
39  mi disse, “va, e vedi la lor mena.

37  Then said to me the Master: "So that full
39  Experience of this round thou bear away,
39  Now go and see what their condition is.

40  Li tuoi ragionamenti sian là corti;
41  mentre che torni, parlerò con questa,
42  che ne conceda i suoi omeri forti.”

40  There let thy conversation be concise;
41  Till thou returnest I will speak with him,
42  That he concede to us his stalwart shoulders."

43  Così ancor su per la strema testa
44  di quel settimo cerchio tutto solo
45  andai, dove sedea la gente mesta.

43  Thus farther still upon the outermost
44  Head of that seventh circle all alone
45  I went, where sat the melancholy folk.

46  Per li occhi fora scoppiava lor duolo;
47  di qua, di là soccorrien con le mani
48  quando a' vapori, e quando al caldo suolo:

46  Out of their eyes was gushing forth their woe;
47  This way, that way, they helped them with their hands
48  Now from the flames and now from the hot soil.
 
49  non altrimenti fan di state i cani
50  or col ceffo or col piè, quando son morsi
51  o da pulci o da mosche o da tafani.

49  Not otherwise in summer do the dogs,
50  Now with the foot, now with the muzzle, when
51  By fleas, or flies, or gadflies, they are bitten.

52  Poi che nel viso a certi li occhi porsi,
53  ne' quali 'l doloroso foco casca,
54  non ne conobbi alcun; ma io m'accorsi

52  When I had turned mine eyes upon the faces
53  Of some, on whom the dolorous fire is falling,
54  Not one of them I knew; but I perceived

55  che dal collo a ciascun pendea una tasca
56  ch'avea certo colore e certo segno,
57  e quindi par che 'l loro occhio si pasca.

55  That from the neck of each there hung a pouch,
56  Which certain colour had, and certain blazon;
57  And thereupon it seems their eyes are feeding.

58  E com' io riguardando tra lor vegno,
59  in una borsa gialla vidi azzurro
60  che d'un leone avea faccia e contegno.

58  And as I gazing round me come among them,
59  Upon a yellow pouch I azure saw
60  That had the face and posture of a lion.

61  Poi, procedendo di mio sguardo il curro,
62  vidine un'altra come sangue rossa,
63  mostrando un'oca bianca più che burro.

61  Proceeding then the current of my sight,
62  Another of them saw I, red as blood,
63  Display a goose more white than butter is.

64  E un che d'una scrofa azzurra e grossa
 65  segnato avea lo suo sacchetto bianco,
 66  mi disse: “Che fai tu in questa fossa?

64  And one, who with an azure sow and gravid
65  Emblazoned had his little pouch of white,
66  Said unto me: "What dost thou in this moat?

67  Or te ne va; e perché se' vivo anco,
68  sappi che 'l mio vicin Vitalïano
69  sederà qui dal mio sinistro fianco.

67  Now get thee gone; and since thou'rt still alive,
68  Know that a neighbour of mine, Vitaliano,
69  Will have his seat here on my left-hand side.

70  Con questi Fiorentin son padoano:
71  spesse fïate mi 'ntronan li orecchi
72  gridando: 'Vegna 'l cavalier sovrano,

70  A Paduan am I with these Florentines;
71  Full many a time they thunder in mine ears,
72  Exclaiming, 'Come the sovereign cavalier,

73  che recherà la tasca con tre becchi!'”
74  Qui distorse la bocca e di fuor trasse
75  la lingua, come bue che 'l naso lecchi.

73  He who shall bring the satchel with three goats;'"
74  Then twisted he his mouth, and forth he thrust
75  His tongue, like to an ox that licks its nose.

76  E io, temendo no'l più star crucciasse
77  lui che di poco star m'avea 'mmonito,
78  torna'mi in dietro da l'anime lasse.

76  And fearing lest my longer stay might vex
77  Him who had warned me not to tarry long,
78  Backward I turned me from those weary souls.

79  Trova' il duca mio ch'era salito
80   già su la groppa del fiero animale,
81  e disse a me: “Or sie forte e ardito.

79  I found my Guide, who had already mounted
80  Upon the back of that wild animal,
81  And said to me: "Now be both strong and bold.

82  Omai si scende per sì fatte scale;
83  monta dinanzi, ch'i' voglio esser mezzo,
84  sì che la coda non possa far male.”

82  Now we descend by stairways such as these;
83  Mount thou in front, for I will be midway,
84  So that the tail may have no power to harm thee."

85  Qual è colui che sì presso ha 'l riprezzo
86  de la quartana, c'ha già l'unghie smorte,
87  e triema tutto pur guardando 'l rezzo,

85  Such as he is who has so near the ague
86  Of quartan that his nails are blue already,
87  And trembles all, but looking at the shade;

88  tal divenn' io a le parole porte;
89  ma vergogna mi fé le sue minacce,
90  che innanzi a buon segnor fa servo forte.

88  Even such became I at those proffered words;
89  But shame in me his menaces produced,
90  Which maketh servant strong before good master.

91  I' m'assettai in su quelle spallacce;
92  sì volli dir, ma la voce non venne
93  com' io credetti: “Fa che tu m'abbracce.”

91  I seated me upon those monstrous shoulders;
92  I wished to say, and yet the voice came not
93  As I believed, "Take heed that thou embrace me."

94  Ma esso, ch'altra volta mi sovvenne
95  ad altro forse, tosto ch'i' montai
96  con le braccia m'avvinse e mi sostenne;

94  But he, who other times had rescued me
95  In other peril, soon as I had mounted,
96  Within his arms encircled and sustained me,

97  e disse: “Gerïon, moviti omai:
98  le rote larghe, e lo scender sia poco;
99  pensa la nova soma che tu hai.”

97  And said: "Now, Geryon, bestir thyself;
98  The circles large, and the descent be little;
98  Think of the novel burden which thou hast."

100  Come la navicella esce di loco
101  in dietro in dietro, sì quindi si tolse;
102  e poi ch'al tutto si sentì a gioco,

100  Even as the little vessel shoves from shore,
101  Backward, still backward, so he thence withdrew;
102  And when he wholly felt himself afloat,

103  là 'v' era 'l petto, la coda rivolse,
104  e quella tesa, come anguilla, mosse,
105  e con le branche l'aere a sé raccolse.
103  There where his breast had been he turned his tail,
104  And that extended like an eel he moved,
105  And with his paws drew to himself the air.
106  Maggior paura non credo che fosse
107  quando Fetonte abbandonò li freni,
108  per che 'l ciel, come pare ancor, si cosse;
106  A greater fear I do not think there was
107  What time abandoned Phaeton the reins,
108  Whereby the heavens, as still appears, were scorched;

109  né quando Icaro misero le reni
110  sentì spennar per la scaldata cera,
111  gridando il padre a lui “Mala via tieni!”

109  Nor when the wretched Icarus his flanks
110  Felt stripped of feathers by the melting wax,
111  His father crying, "An ill way thou takest!"

112  che fu la mia, quando vidi ch'i' era
113  ne l'aere d'ogne parte, e vidi spenta
114  ogne veduta fuor che de la fera.

112  Than was my own, when I perceived myself
113  On all sides in the air, and saw extinguished
114  The sight of everything but of the monster.

115  Ella sen va notando lenta lenta;
 116  rota e discende, ma non me n'accorgo
 117  se non che al viso e di sotto mi venta.

115  Onward he goeth, swimming slowly, slowly;
116  Wheels and descends, but I perceive it only
117  By wind upon my face and from below.

118  Io sentia già da la man destra il gorgo
119  far sotto noi un orribile scroscio,
120  per che con li occhi 'n giù la testa sporgo. 

118  I heard already on the right the whirlpool
119  Making a horrible crashing under us;
120  Whence I thrust out my head with eyes cast downward.

121  Allor fu' io più timido a lo stoscio,
122  però ch'i' vidi fuochi e senti' pianti;
123  ond' io tremando tutto mi raccoscio.

121  Then was I still more fearful of the abyss;
122  Because I fires beheld, and heard laments,
123  Whereat I, trembling, all the closer cling.

124  E vidi poi, ché nol vedea davanti,
125  lo scendere e 'l girar per li gran mali
126  che s'appressavan da diversi canti.

124  I saw then, for before I had not seen it,
125  The turning and descending, by great horrors
126  That were approaching upon divers sides.
 
127  Come 'l falcon ch'è stato assai su l'ali,
128  che sanza veder logoro o uccello
129  fa dire al falconiere “Omè, tu cali!”

127  As falcon who has long been on the wing,
128  Who, without seeing either lure or bird,
129  Maketh the falconer say, "Ah me, thou stoopest,"

130  discende lasso onde si move isnello,
131  per cento rote, e da lunge si pone
132  dal suo maestro, disdegnoso e fello;

130  Descendeth weary, whence he started swiftly,
131  Thorough a hundred circles, and alights
132  Far from his master, sullen and disdainful;

133  così ne puose al fondo Gerïone
134  al piè al piè de la stagliata rocca,
135  e, discarcate le nostre persone,

136  si dileguò come da corda cocca.
133  Even thus did Geryon place us on the bottom,
134  Close to the bases of the rough-hewn rock,
135  And being disencumbered of our persons,
136  He sped away as arrow from the string.
Canto XVIII
In a sense this canto shows us a progression of the psyche from Canto I because the psyche of the aspirant is no longer in the groggy unorganized state half way between sleep and waking, but it has rediscovered, even as it probes the depths of hell, its own nature, which is to find in chaos and organizing intelligence, the reasoning power which is the very essence of its existence.  Line 4 of this canto (Nel dritto mezzo del campo maligno, in the direct middle of the malignant field) reminds us of the Nel mezzo del cammin (in the middle of the way), which begins the entire Commedia.  We are no longer drowning or just escaped from drowning as the swimmer in the first canto, even Hell now has a definite shape, a definite proportion, and in this canto Dante is very precise in telling us just how that shape and those proportions are — in his worldview at least — Divinely arranged.  One is reminded of the memory palaces revived from antiquity in the renaissance, and as murky and terrible as the Inferno is, it shows that it springs from this profound ability of the psyche to create order.  Here we find ourselves in a vast amphitheater (and perhaps here we recall St. Augustine’s denunciation of the theater) but an amphitheater not of seats for a spectacle, but a circular array of descending pouches or depression connected by one to another as the wind around an abyss by crags and bridges.  Crowds of sinners, in a parodic presentation, of the Jubilee crowds in Roman in the year 1300, run round these pouches, panderers and seducers in one direction and flatterers in another.  Here perhaps is the first attempt at traffic control, on group keeping to one side of the way, the other to the side opposite, yet both are pursued by demons (horned ones in the case of the panderers and seducers, to remind us of the role in the manufacture of cuckolds), which hurry them forward with lashes.  Hell is a place where wherein the psyche must move, but is going nowhere.  Hell is a place where rest is forbidden, and torment motivates every futile step.  

The numerological play which characterizes the whole of the Commedia, is much on display here, with the ten pouches of Malebolge, and we even have among the tercets the parody of the trinity as the sinners lashed from behind do not stay for a second lash, much less a third, and we might well recall here the folklore prohibition that demons must obey.  If a demon invades your house, you may give him a sieve, and demand that he count the holes.  He goes one, two, but cannot say three, because that would recall the holy trinity, and so he stays all night in his futile endeavor, until dawn forces him back into whatever crevasse of crack he crawled out of.  Here too in the demon's curse: Get thee gone, panderer, there are no women here for coin, we see an echo of the sin of usury, a trading of something fertile and good, for something abstract (money) and sterile.

We might also notice the eating metaphors (our eyes unfed or hell as a place of pungent sauces, or the sinner's head compared to a pumpkin or gourd {la zucca, line 124), used in the interactions between the aspirant and the sinners, which when we come to those who have used their mouths to flatter, are now force to eat this effluent like that, as text tells, which flows from human privies.  They dine, snorting like hogs and smacking with their open palms their own shit covered muzzles, on a mold which has adhered to the walls of their pouch, a mold whose stench makes the eyes water and offends the nostrils.  Here we meet one who sold his own kin for coin, and he is so encrusted with the ordure of his skin the aspirant cannot discern if he is layman or cleric, in brief, the man's hair is so slathered with shit that the viewer cannot tell if he is tonsured or not.  But the aspirant does recognize him.  The canto concludes with a disgusting image of Thais, a harlot and a flatterer, which Virgil bids his protégé to thrust his face foreword, face to face, a gesture we have also seen before.  This face is so disgusting that one good look is enough to satiate (the word, sazie plainly referring to having eaten enough, but mistranslated by Longfellow, as "satisfied", a word that misses the telling association with eating.

1  Luogo è in inferno detto Malebolge,
2  tutto di pietra di color ferrigno,
3  come la cerchia che dintorno il volge.

1  There is a place in Hell called Malebolge,
2  Wholly of stone and of an iron colour,
3  As is the circle that around it turns.

4  Nel dritto mezzo del campo maligno
5  vaneggia un pozzo assai largo e profondo,
6  di cui suo loco dicerò l'ordigno.

4  Right in the middle of the field malign
5  There yawns a well exceeding wide and deep,
6  Of which its place the structure will recount.

7  Quel cinghio che rimane adunque è tondo
8  tra 'l pozzo e 'l piè de l'alta ripa dura,
9  e ha distinto in dieci valli il fondo.

7  Round, then, is that enclosure which remains
8  Between the well and foot of the high, hard bank,
9  And has distinct in valleys ten its bottom.

10  Quale, dove per guardia de le mura
11  più e più fossi cingon li castelli,
12  la parte dove son rende figura,

10  As where for the protection of the walls
11  Many and many moats surround the castles,
12  The part in which they are a figure forms,

13  tale imagine quivi facean quelli;
14  e come a tai fortezze da' lor sogli
15  a la ripa di fuor son ponticelli,

13  Just such an image those presented there;
14  And as about such strongholds from their gates
15  Unto the outer bank are little bridges,

16  così da imo de la roccia scogli
17  movien che ricidien li argini e ' fossi
18  infino al pozzo che i tronca e raccogli.

16  So from the precipice's base did crags
17  Project, which intersected dikes and moats,
18  Unto the well that truncates and collects them.

19  In questo luogo, de la schiena scossi
20  di Gerïon, trovammoci; e 'l poeta
21  tenne a sinistra, e io dietro mi mossi.

19  Within this place, down shaken from the back
20  Of Geryon, we found us; and the Poet
21  Held to the left, and I moved on behind.

22  A la man destra vidi nova pieta,
23  novo tormento e novi frustatori,
24  di che la prima bolgia era repleta.

22  Upon my right hand I beheld new anguish,
23  New torments, and new wielders of the lash,
24  Wherewith the foremost Bolgia was replete.

25  Nel fondo erano ignudi i peccatori;
26  dal mezzo in qua ci venien verso 'l volto,
27  di là con noi, ma con passi maggiori,

25  Down at the bottom were the sinners naked;
26  This side the middle came they facing us,
27  Beyond it, with us, but with greater steps;


28  come i Roman per l'essercito molto,
29  l'anno del giubileo, su per lo ponte
30  hanno a passar la gente modo colto,

28  Even as the Romans, for the mighty host,
29  The year of Jubilee, upon the bridge,
30  Have chosen a mode to pass the people over;

31  che da l'un lato tutti hanno la fronte
32  verso 'l castello e vanno a Santo Pietro,
33  da l'altra sponda vanno verso 'l monte.

31  For all upon one side towards the Castle
32  Their faces have, and go unto St. Peter's;
33  On the other side they go towards the Mountain.

34  Di qua, di là, su per lo sasso tetro
35  vidi demon cornuti con gran ferze,
36  che li battien crudelmente di retro.

34  This side and that, along the livid stone
35  Beheld I horned demons with great scourges,
36  Who cruelly were beating them behind.

37  Ahi come facean lor levar le berze
38  a le prime percosse! già nessuno
39  le seconde aspettava nè le terze.

37  Ah me! how they did make them lift their legs
38  At the first blows! and sooth not any one
39  The second waited for, nor for the third.

40  Mentr' io andava, li occhi miei in uno
41  furo scontrati; e io sì tosto dissi:
42  “Già di veder costui non son digiuno.”

40  While I was going on, mine eyes by one
41  Encountered were; and straight I said: "Already
42  With sight of this one I am not unfed."

43  Per ch'ïo a figurarlo i piedi affissi;
44  e 'l dolce duca meco si ristette,
45  e assentio ch'alquanto in dietro gissi.
43  Therefore I stayed my feet to make him out,
44  And with me the sweet Guide came to a stand,
45  And to my going somewhat back assented;

46  E quel frustato celar si credette
47  bassando 'l viso; ma poco li valse,
48  ch'io dissi: “O tu che l'occhio a terra gette,

46  And he, the scourged one, thought to hide himself,
47  Lowering his face, but little it availed him;
48  For said I: "Thou that castest down thine eyes,

49  se le fazion che porti non son false,
50  Venedico se' tu Caccianemico.
51  Ma che ti mena a sì pungenti salse?”

49  If false are not the features which thou bearest,
50  Thou art Venedico Caccianimico;
51  But what doth bring thee to such pungent sauces?"

52  Ed elli a me: “Mal volontier lo dico;
53  ma sforzami la tua chiara favella,
54  che mi fa sovvenir del mondo antico.

52  And he to me: "Unwillingly I tell it;
53  But forces me thine utterance distinct,
54  Which makes me recollect the ancient world.

55  I' fui colui che la Ghisolabella
56  condussi a far la voglia del marchese,
57  come che suoni la sconcia novella.

55  I was the one who the fair Ghisola
56  Induced to grant the wishes of the Marquis,
57  Howe'er the shameless story may be told.

58  E non pur io qui piango bolognese;
59  anzi n'è questo loco tanto pieno,
60  che tante lingue non son ora apprese

58  Not the sole Bolognese am I who weeps here;
59  Nay, rather is this place so full of them,
60  That not so many tongues to-day are taught

61  a dicer 'sipa' tra Sàvena e Reno;
62  e se di ciò vuoi fede o testimonio,
63  rècati a mente il nostro avaro seno.”

61  'Twixt Reno and Savena to say 'sipa;'
62  And if thereof thou wishest pledge or proof,
63  Bring to thy mind our avaricious heart."

64  Così parlando il percosse un demonio
65  de la sua scurïada, e disse: “Via,
66  ruffian! qui non son femmine da conio.”

64  While speaking in this manner, with his scourge
65  A demon smote him, and said: "Get thee gone
66  Pander, there are no women here for coin."

67  I' mi raggiunsi con la scorta mia;
68  poscia con pochi passi divenimmo
69  là 'v' uno scoglio de la ripa uscia.

67  I joined myself again unto mine Escort;
68  Thereafterward with footsteps few we came
69  To where a crag projected from the bank.

70  Assai leggeramente quel salimmo;
71  e vòlti a destra su per la sua scheggia,
72  da quelle cerchie etterne ci partimmo.

70  This very easily did we ascend,
71  And turning to the right along its ridge,
72  From those eternal circles we departed.

73  Quando noi fummo là dov' el vaneggia
74  di sotto per dar passo a li sferzati,
75  lo duca disse: “Attienti, e fa che feggia

73  When we were there, where it is hollowed out
74  Beneath, to give a passage to the scourged,
75  The Guide said: "Wait, and see that on thee strike

76  lo viso in te di quest' altri mal nati,
77  ai quali ancor non vedesti la faccia
78  però che son con noi insieme andati.”

76  The vision of those others evil-born,
77  Of whom thou hast not yet beheld the faces,
78  Because together with us they have gone."

79  Del vecchio ponte guardavam la traccia
80  che venìa verso noi da l'altra banda,
81  e che la ferza similmente scaccia.

79  From the old bridge we looked upon the train
80  Which tow'rds us came upon the other border,
81  And which the scourges in like manner smite.

82  E 'l buon maestro, sanza mia dimanda,
83  mi disse: “Guarda quel grande che vene,
84  e per dolor non par lagrime spanda:

82  And the good Master, without my inquiring,
83  Said to me: "See that tall one who is coming,
84  And for his pain seems not to shed a tear;

85  quanto aspetto reale ancor ritene!
86  Quelli è Iasón, che per cuore e per senno
87  li Colchi del monton privati féne.

85  Still what a royal aspect he retains!
86  That Jason is, who by his heart and cunning
87  The Colchians of the Ram made destitute.

88  Ello passò per l'isola di Lenno
89  poi che l'ardite femmine spietate
90  tutti li maschi loro a morte dienno.

88  He by the isle of Lemnos passed along
89  After the daring women pitiless
90  Had unto death devoted all their males.

91  Ivi con segni e con parole ornate
92  Isifile ingannò, la giovinetta
93  che prima avea tutte l'altre ingannate.

91  There with his tokens and with ornate words
92  Did he deceive Hypsipyle, the maiden
93  Who first, herself, had all the rest deceived.

94  Lasciolla quivi, gravida, soletta;
95  tal colpa a tal martiro lui condanna;
96  e anche di Medea si fa vendetta.

94  There did he leave her pregnant and forlorn;
95  Such sin unto such punishment condemns him,
96  And also for Medea is vengeance done.

97  Con lui sen va chi da tal parte inganna;
98  e questo basti de la prima valle
99  sapere e di color che 'n sé assanna.”

97  With him go those who in such wise deceive;
98  And this sufficient be of the first valley
99  To know, and those that in its jaws it holds."

100  Già eravam là 've lo stretto calle
101  con l'argine secondo s'incrocicchia,
102  e fa di quello ad un altr' arco spalle.

100  We were already where the narrow path
101  Crosses athwart the second dike, and forms
102  Of that a buttress for another arch.

103  Quindi sentimmo gente che si nicchia
104  ne l'altra bolgia e che col muso scuffa,
105  e sé medesma con le palme picchia.

103  Thence we heard people, who are making moan
104  In the next Bolgia, snorting with their muzzles,
105  And with their palms beating upon themselves

106  Le ripe eran grommate d'una muffa,
107  per l'alito di giù che vi s'appasta,
108  che con li occhi e col naso facea zuffa.

106  The margins were incrusted with a mould
107  By exhalation from below, that sticks there,
108  And with the eyes and nostrils wages war.

109  Lo fondo è cupo sì, che non ci basta
110  loco a veder sanza montare al dosso
111  de l'arco, ove lo scoglio più sovrasta.

109  The bottom is so deep, no place suffices
110  To give us sight of it, without ascending
111  The arch's back, where most the crag impends.

112  Quivi venimmo; e quindi giù nel fosso
113  vidi gente attuffata in uno sterco
114  che da li uman privadi parea mosso.

112  Thither we came, and thence down in the moat
113  I saw a people smothered in a filth
114  That out of human privies seemed to flow;

115  E mentre ch'io là giù con l'occhio cerco,
116  vidi un col capo sì di merda lordo,
117  che non parëa s'era laico o cherco.

115  And whilst below there with mine eye I search,
116  I saw one with his head so foul with ordure,
117  It was not clear if he were clerk or layman.

118  Quei mi sgridò: “Perché se' tu sì gordo
119  di riguardar più me che li altri brutti?”
120  E io a lui: “Perché, se ben ricordo,

118  He screamed to me: "Wherefore art thou so eager
119  To look at me more than the other foul ones?"
120  And I to him: "Because, if I remember,

121  già t'ho veduto coi capelli asciutti,
122  e se' Alessio Interminei da Lucca:
123  però t'adocchio più che li altri tutti.”

121  I have already seen thee with dry hair,
122  And thou'rt Alessio Interminei of Lucca;
123  Therefore I eye thee more than all the others."

124  Ed elli allor, battendosi la zucca:
125  “Qua giù m'hanno sommerso le lusinghe
126  ond' io non ebbi mai la lingua stucca.”

124  And he thereon, belabouring his pumpkin:
125  "The flatteries have submerged me here below,
126  Wherewith my tongue was never surfeited."

127  Appresso ciò lo duca “Fa che pinghe,”
128  mi disse, “il viso un poco più avante,
129  sì che la faccia ben con l'occhio attinghe

127  Then said to me the Guide: "See that thou thrust
128  Thy visage somewhat farther in advance,
129  That with thine eyes thou well the face attain

130  di quella sozza e scapigliata fante
131  che là si graffia con l'unghie merdose,
132  e or s'accoscia e ora è in piedi stante.

130  Of that uncleanly and dishevelled drab,
131  Who there doth scratch herself with filthy nails,
132  And crouches now, and now on foot is standing.

133  Taïde è, la puttana che rispuose
134  al drudo suo quando disse 'Ho io grazie
135  grandi apo te?': 'Anzi maravigliose!'

133  Thais the harlot is it, who replied
134  Unto her paramour, when he said, 'Have I
135  Great gratitude from thee?'—'Nay, marvellous;'

136  E quinci sian le nostre viste sazie.”

136  And herewith let our sight be satisfied."

Canto XIX
In an often apostrophic, prophetic style (O Simon Mago, O miseri seguaci, O somma sapienza, O qual che se' che 'l di sù tien di sotto, Ahi, Costantin ...) Canto XIX is the canto of the simoniac Popes, the canto of inversions.  The chief inversion being that any Pope, the infallible Vicar of Christ on Earth, should so reverse the calling of his office as to use his position for money and secular power, selling church offices and sacraments.  One of the Popes that the protagonists meet here is Pope Nicholas III, and like all the other simoniacs he is upside down in his tomb, his feet protruding in the air being laced with running fire.  Like others in Hell these sinners run, but even more than the others, the motions of their feet, although incessant, are utterly futile.  Nicholas mistakes Dante for his successor, whom he denounces for the very sin that he himself helped to make routine in the office.  After, being corrected, he does not change his cynical accusatory tirade, but merely directs it towards his fellow Bolognese.  There are a lot of references to marriage, fornication, and offspring, the Bride of the church, the whore of Babylon, the nepotism of the Pope, etc. the text's way of drawing the portrait of an evil by showing it off against the foil of the good.  In a similar manner, Dante shows the correct relationship between authority and those whom authority must lead and serve, by emphasizing the devotion that he and Virgil have for one another, i.e., knowing each other’s thoughts, and at one point literally becoming one as Virgil carries his protege over rough ground in his very arms.  But wait ... if a Pope is infallible, how can a layman question or accuse him without himself being guilty of blasphemy or heresy?  How?  By virtue of his devotion to Christ's sole dictum: Follow me.  The aspirant now becomes the confessor to one who laments his punishment, but not his sins, and in this parodic scene, the confessee receives not absolution for his trouble but a tirade of denunciation.  There is also a little biographical illustration, wherein the aspirant tells of breaking a baptismal font of the Florentine church of Saint John's, which should be a grave desecration and impiety, but it is instead offered as an act of Christian virtue because it was done to save the life of a child who was drowning there.  Here, Dante becomes the midwife of a soul, which is drowning in amniotic waters of the uterine baptismal.  Does he means by this that when the church is corrupted then it can no longer be the good Mother to its children or the good bride of Christ, but becomes instead a poisonous womb that drowns and aborts its own pups?  The main argument here is the one that Christ elucidated when asked about paying taxes, showing that the talent to be given to the tax collector was minted with the face of Caesar.  In brief, secular power and sacred authority are clearly two different things, and that when the Church tries to be both, through the sin of simony, it inverts its calling, and becomes a hoarder and whore of wealth, not virtue.  And is such cases, virtue, even virtue without the authority of office, assumes the role of the prophet, and in that role it is the profane-seeming laymen who wears the mantle of Christ, not His sacred-seeming vicar.  It does not take much imagination to transfer this allegory to our own times.      

1  O Simon mago, o miseri seguaci
2  che le cose di Dio, che di bontate
3  deon essere spose, e voi rapaci

1  O Simon Magus, O forlorn disciples,
2  Ye who the things of God, which ought to be
3  The brides of holiness, rapaciously

4  per oro e per argento avolterate,
5  or convien che per voi suoni la tromba,
6  però che ne la terza bolgia state.

4  For silver and for gold do prostitute,
5  Now it behoves for you the trumpet sound,
6  Because in this third Bolgia ye abide.

7  Già eravamo, a la seguente tomba,
8  montati de lo scoglio in quella parte
9  ch'a punto sovra mezzo 'l fosso piomba.

7  We had already on the following tomb
8  Ascended to that portion of the crag
9  Which o'er the middle of the moat hangs plumb.

10  O somma sapïenza, quanta è l'arte
11  che mostri in cielo, in terra e nel mal mondo,
12  e quanto giusto tua virtù comparte!

10  Wisdom supreme, O how great art thou showest
11  In heaven, in earth, and in the evil world,
12  And with what justice doth thy power distribute!

13  Io vidi per le coste e per lo fondo
14  piena la pietra livida di fóri,
15  d'un largo tutti e ciascun era tondo.

13  I saw upon the sides and on the bottom
14  The livid stone with perforations filled,
15  All of one size, and every one was round.

16  Non mi parean men ampi né maggiori
17  che que' che son nel mio bel San Giovanni,
18  fatti per loco d'i battezzatori;

16  To me less ample seemed they not, nor greater
17  Than those that in my beautiful Saint John
18  Are fashioned for the place of the baptisers,

19  l'un de li quali, ancor non è molt' anni,
20  rupp' io per un che dentro v'annegava:
21  e questo sia suggel ch'ogn' omo sganni.

19  And one of which, not many years ago,
20  I broke for some one, who was drowning in it;
21  Be this a seal all men to undeceive.

22  Fuor de la bocca a ciascun soperchiava
23  d'un peccator li piedi e de le gambe
24  infino al grosso, e l'altro dentro stava.

22  Out of the mouth of each one there protruded
23  The feet of a transgressor, and the legs
24  Up to the calf, the rest within remained.

25  Le piante erano a tutti accese intrambe;
26  per che si forte guizzavan le giunte,
27  che spezzate averien ritorte e strambe.

25  In all of them the soles were both on fire;
26  Wherefore the joints so violently quivered,
27  They would have snapped asunder withes and bands.

28  Qual suole il fiammeggiar de le cose unte
29  muoversi pur su per la strema buccia,
30  tal era lì dai calcagni a le punte.

28  Even as the flame of unctuous things is wont
29  To move upon the outer surface only,
30  So likewise was it there from heel to point.

31  “Chi è colui, maestro, che si cruccia
32  guizzando più che li altri suoi consorti,”
33  diss' io, “e cui più roggia fiamma succia?”

31  "Master, who is that one who writhes himself,
32  More than his other comrades quivering,"
33  I said, "and whom a redder flame is sucking?"

34  Ed elli a me: “Se tu vuo' ch'i' ti porti
35  là giù per quella ripa che più giace,
36  da lui saprai di sé e de' suoi torti.”

34  And he to me: "If thou wilt have me bear thee
35  Down there along that bank which lowest lies,
36  From him thou'lt know his errors and himself."

37  E io: “Tanto m'è bel, quanto a te piace:
38  tu se' segnore, e sai ch'i' non mi parto
39  dal tuo volere, e sai quel che si tace.”

37  And I: "What pleases thee, to me is pleasing;
38  Thou art my Lord, and knowest that I depart not
39  From thy desire, and knowest what is not spoken."

40  Allor venimmo in su l'argine quarto;
41  volgemmo e discendemmo a mano stanca
42  là giù nel fondo foracchiato e arto.

40  Straightway upon the fourth dike we arrived;
41  We turned, and on the left-hand side descended
42  Down to the bottom full of holes and narrow.

43  Lo buon maestro ancor de la sua anca
44  non mi dipuose, sì mi giunse al rotto
45  di quel che si piangeva con la zanca.

43  And the good Master yet from off his haunch
44  Deposed me not, till to the hole he brought me
45  Of him who so lamented with his shanks.

46  “O qual che se' che 'l di sù tien di sotto,
47  anima trista come pal commessa,”
48  comincia' io a dir, “se puoi, fa motto.”

46  "Whoe'er thou art, that standest upside down,
47  O doleful soul, implanted like a stake,"
48  To say began I, "if thou canst, speak out."

49  Io stava come 'l frate che confessa
50  lo perfido assessin, che, poi ch'è fitto,
51  richiama lui per che la morte cessa.

49  I stood even as the friar who is confessing
50  The false assassin, who, when he is fixed,
51  Recalls him, so that death may be delayed.

52  Ed el gridò: “Se' tu già costì ritto,
53  se' tu già costì ritto, Bonifazio?
54  Di parecchi anni mi mentì lo scritto.

52  And he cried out: "Dost thou stand there already,
53  Dost thou stand there already, Boniface?
54  By many years the record lied to me.

55  Se' tu sì tosto di quell' aver sazio
56  per lo qual non temesti tòrre a 'nganno
57  la bella donna, e poi di farne strazio?”

55  Art thou so early satiate with that wealth,
56  For which thou didst not fear to take by fraud
57  The beautiful Lady, and then work her woe?"

58  Tal mi fec' io, quai son color che stanno,
59  per non intender ciò ch'è lor risposto,
60  quasi scornati, e risponder non sanno.

58  Such I became, as people are who stand,
59  Not comprehending what is answered them,
60  As if bemocked, and know not how to answer.

61  Allor Virgilio disse: “Dilli tosto:
62  'Non son colui, non son colui che credi'”;
63  e io rispuosi come a me fu imposto.

61  Then said Virgilius: "Say to him straightway,
62  'I am not he, I am not he thou thinkest.'"
63  And I replied as was imposed on me.

64  Per che lo spirto tutti storse i piedi;
65  poi, sospirando e con voce di pianto,
66  mi disse: “Dunque che a me richiedi?

64  Whereat the spirit writhed with both his feet,
65  Then, sighing, with a voice of lamentation
66  Said to me: "Then what wantest thou of me?

67  Se di saper ch'i' sia ti cal cotanto,
68  che tu abbi però la ripa corsa,
69  sappi ch'i' fui vestito del gran manto;

67  If who I am thou carest so much to know,
68  That thou on that account hast crossed the bank,
69  Know that I vested was with the great mantle;

70  e veramente fui figliuol de l'orsa,
71  cupido sì per avanzar li orsatti,
72  che sù l'avere e qui me misi in borsa.

70  And truly was I son of the She-bear,
71  So eager to advance the cubs, that wealth
72  Above, and here myself, I pocketed.

73  Di sotto al capo mio son li altri tratti
74  che precedetter me simoneggiando,
75  per le fessure de la pietra piatti.

73  Beneath my head the others are dragged down
74  Who have preceded me in simony,
75  Flattened along the fissure of the rock.

76  Là giù cascherò io altresì quando
77  verrà colui ch'i' credea che tu fossi,
78  allor ch'i' feci 'l sùbito dimando.

76  Below there I shall likewise fall, whenever
77  That one shall come who I believed thou wast,
78  What time the sudden question I proposed.

79  Ma più è 'l tempo già che i piè mi cossi
80  e ch'i' son stato così sottosopra,
81  ch'el non starà piantato coi piè rossi:

79  But longer I my feet already toast,
80  And here have been in this way upside down,
81  Than he will planted stay with reddened feet;

82  ché dopo lui verrà di più laida opra,
83  di ver' ponente, un pastor sanza legge,
84  tal che convien che lui e me ricuopra.

82  For after him shall come of fouler deed
83  From tow'rds the west a Pastor without law,
84  Such as befits to cover him and me.

85  Nuovo Iasón sarà, di cui si legge
86  ne' Maccabei; e come a quel fu molle
87  suo re, così fia lui chi Francia regge.”
85  New Jason will he be, of whom we read
86  In Maccabees; and as his king was pliant,
87  So he who governs France shall be to this one."

88  Io non so s'i' mi fui qui troppo folle,
89  ch'i' pur rispuosi lui a questo metro:
90  “Deh, or mi dì: quanto tesoro volle

88  I do not know if I were here too bold,
89  That him I answered only in this metre:
90  "I pray thee tell me now how great a treasure

91  Nostro Segnore in prima da san Pietro
92  ch'ei ponesse le chiavi in sua balìa?
93  Certo non chiese se non 'Viemmi retro.'

91  Our Lord demanded of Saint Peter first,
92  Before he put the keys into his keeping?
93  Truly he nothing asked but 'Follow me.'

94  Né Pier né li altri tolsero a Matia
95  oro od argento, quando fu sortito
96  al loco che perdé l'anima ria.

94  Nor Peter nor the rest asked of Matthias
95  Silver or gold, when he by lot was chosen
96  Unto the place the guilty soul had lost.

97  Però ti sta, ché tu se' ben punito;
98  e guarda ben la mal tolta moneta
99  ch'esser ti fece contra Carlo ardito.

97  Therefore stay here, for thou art justly punished,
98  And keep safe guard o'er the ill-gotten money,
99  Which caused thee to be valiant against Charles.

100  E se non fosse ch'ancor lo mi vieta
101  la reverenza de le somme chiavi
102  che tu tenesti ne la vita lieta,

100  And were it not that still forbids it me
101  The reverence for the keys superlative
102  Thou hadst in keeping in the gladsome life,

103  io userei parole ancor più gravi;
104  ché la vostra avarizia il mondo attrista,
105  calcando i buoni e sollevando i pravi.

103  I would make use of words more grievous still;
104  Because your avarice afflicts the world,
105  Trampling the good and lifting the depraved.

106  Di voi pastor s'accorse il Vangelista,
107  quando colei che siede sopra l'acque
108  puttaneggiar coi regi a lui fu vista;

106  The Evangelist you Pastors had in mind,
107  When she who sitteth upon many waters
108  To fornicate with kings by him was seen;

109  quella che con le sette teste nacque,
110  e da le diece corna ebbe argomento,
111  fin che virtute al suo marito piacque.

109  The same who with the seven heads was born,
110  And power and strength from the ten horns received,
111  So long as virtue to her spouse was pleasing.

112  Fatto v'avete dio d'oro e d'argento;
113  e che altro è da voi a l'idolatre,
114  se non ch'elli uno, e voi ne orate cento?

112  Ye have made yourselves a god of gold and silver;
113  And from the idolater how differ ye,
114  Save that he one, and ye a hundred worship?

115  Ahi, Costantin, di quanto mal fu matre,
116  non la tua conversion, ma quella dote
117  che da te prese il primo ricco patre!”

115  Ah, Constantine! of how much ill was mother,
116  Not thy conversion, but that marriage dower
117  Which the first wealthy Father took from thee!"

118  E mentr' io li cantava cotai note,
119  o ira o coscïenza che 'l mordesse,
120  forte spingava con ambo le piote.

118  And while I sang to him such notes as these,
119  Either that anger or that conscience stung him,
120  He struggled violently with both his feet.

121  I' credo ben ch'al mio duca piacesse,
122  con si contenta labbia sempre attese
123  lo suon de le parole vere espresse.

121  I think in sooth that it my Leader pleased,
122  With such contented lip he listened ever
123  Unto the sound of the true words expressed.

124  Però con ambo le braccia mi prese;
125  e poi che tutto su mi s'ebbe al petto,
126  rimontò per la via onde discese.

124  Therefore with both his arms he took me up,
125  And when he had me all upon his breast,
126  Remounted by the way where he descended.

127  Né si stancò d'avermi a sé distretto,
128  sì men portò sovra 'l colmo de l'arco
129  che dal quarto al quinto argine è tragetto.

127  Nor did he tire to have me clasped to him;
128  But bore me to the summit of the arch
129  Which from the fourth dike to the fifth is passage.

130  Quivi soavemente spuose il carco,
131  soave per lo scoglio sconcio ed erto
132  che sarebbe a le capre duro varco.

130  There tenderly he laid his burden down,
131  Tenderly on the crag uneven and steep,
132  That would have been hard passage for the goats:

133  Indi un altro vallon mi fu scoperto.

133  Thence was unveiled to me another valley.

Canto XX
It's about Time: and the relationship between origins, destinies, false divination, the impossibility of navigation without correct orientation, and the duel enigma of water (tears, lakes, marshes, rivers) and Time.  Which way does Time run for us, down like tears to water our hearts, or down our backs to innundate our anuses?   

As we go deeper into these levels of Hell, it is easy to begin shifting one's emotional energy away from what one is actually experiencing and into a commentator's role as bystander and witness, getting lost in scholarly quibbles over this or that meaning in the text or over what Dante's intention was in producing the text.  But the real horror, the real despair of seeing the soul-forms of the damned and their utter corruption of the human form and the human being's potential for love, and magnanimity works into one's own soul-form, and one find's oneself awake in the middle of the night pondering the actual state of pain and suffering.  What level of fear might drive a person to foment visions of the future in which a pure malignity is called forth to swallow other fearful people.  And what level of malignity finally releases the spring of cosmic retribution to release its torment upon you, and purge itself in delight at your suffering?   This is horrible beyond pity or piety, and we cannot help but feel that Virgil with his pagan point of view, aligned against pity, standing at the threshold of the future, which is Christian charity and forgiveness, to turn around himself, denounce his protege for his pity and despair, and then look backwards to the founding of this birth city, by a sorceress who, somehow, against all common sense, uses an evil gift for prognostication for everything else, but does not do so to establish her own place of habitation.  Virgil, in fact, seems to be divining about the past!, twisting his story that was written about his effigy in the Aeneid into an entirely different story which exonerates him from the very sin that he is denouncing Dante for pitying.  Dante does indeed suspend his pity, but it is not only the Dante who is the protagonist of the poem that does so.  It is the Dante, in his metaposition as the Poet, who suspends his pity as well, by making Virgil's speech and his aspirant-self's acceptance of it, subtly ironic.  Forget the bond that the mentor and teacher had in the previous canto where they were one, Dante like a babe in arms to his teacher, here, the text simple refers to Virgil as (line 26) as la mia scorta, my companion.  And later, when he begins to praise his teacher again in lines 100 - 103, as a Master whose teachings render all others as spent coals, we wonder what kind of transformation has happened inside the aspirant that he has accepted what the poet Dante has not.  Then too why does Virgil so degrade Manto, a woman, except as a terrible parody of what is to come when another woman, Beatrice, replaces him as the aspirant's lodestar?  Why indeed, and how, does Virgil tell the time at the end of the canto by the phases of a moon, that he cannot see, and which he refers to by an Old Testament icon, Cain, the brother killer, and the Man in the Moon, bristling with thorns.  Virgil is in fact a diviner here, and the aspirant is making use of him, not to mimic him, but to see him too as a cautionary example, and dare I say it, a person who is damned, but deserving of respect and pity.

All this is imbedded in the sex act and the parody of the tree with its entwined serpents in the aside about Tiresias, who becomes a symbol of coitus (back to origins again, and the magical nature that combines opposites, then separates them, and all this seems like an elaborate charade to fool us into believe that the conditions of these souls in hell do not touch us at all, but beneath the charade and smugness that comes from being judge and witness of the evil and punishment of others, is the deep, deep realization that the Universe is not, as Blake might say, a "cloven fiction," it is a whole, full of pain, full of malice, full of grace, full of love, full of intolerable suffering and unspeakable Jouissance, and it all lives inside each one of us, and makes us start in the middle of night and wish either for the oblivion of Death or the eradication of transcendence.

Everyone suffers, and everyone tries to avoid suffering, but not everyone denounces suffering, or revels in the suffering of others, and Dante, the poet, seems to be asking us to have faith in a God who does all these things simultaneously, yet without being tainted by his own creation.  And what a terrible double bind we find ourselves in trying to not only to believe in such an entity but to love IT. 

The whole experience of really reading Dante is awful in the deepest sense of that word.   

1  Di nova pena mi conven far versi
2  e dar matera al ventesimo canto
3  de la prima canzon, ch'è d'i sommersi.

1  Of a new pain behoves me to make verses
2  And give material to the twentieth canto
3  Of the first song, which is of the submerged.

4  Io era già disposto tutto quanto
5  a riguardar ne lo scoperto fondo,
6  che si bagnava d'angoscioso pianto;

4  I was already thoroughly disposed
5  To peer down into the uncovered depth,
6  Which bathed itself with tears of agony;

7  e vidi gente per lo vallon tondo
8  venir, tacendo e lagrimando, al passo
9  che fanno le letane in questo mondo.

7  And people saw I through the circular valley,
8  Silent and weeping, coming at the pace
9  Which in this world the Litanies assume.

10  Come 'l viso mi scese in lor più basso,
11  mirabilmente apparve esser travolto
12  ciascun tra 'l mento e 'l principio del casso,

10  As lower down my sight descended on them,
11  Wondrously each one seemed to be distorted
12  From chin to the beginning of the chest;

13  ché da le reni era tornato 'l volto,
14  e in dietro venir li convenia,
15  perché 'l veder dinanzi era lor tolto.

13  For tow'rds the reins the countenance was turned,
14  And backward it behoved them to advance,
15  As to look forward had been taken from them.

16  Forse per forza già di parlasia
17  si travolse così alcun del tutto;
18  ma io nol vidi, né credo che sia.

16  Perchance indeed by violence of palsy
17  Some one has been thus wholly turned awry;
18  But I ne'er saw it, nor believe it can be.

19  Se Dio ti lasci, lettor, prender frutto
20  di tua lezione, or pensa per te stesso
21  com' io potea tener lo viso asciutto,

19  As God may let thee, Reader, gather fruit
20  From this thy reading, think now for thyself
21  How I could ever keep my face unmoistened,

22  quando la nostra imagine di presso
23  vidi sì torta, che 'l pianto de li occhi
24  le natiche bagnava per lo fesso.

22  When our own image near me I beheld
23  Distorted so, the weeping of the eyes
24  Along the fissure bathed the hinder parts.

25  Certo io piangea, poggiato a un de' rocchi
26  del duro scoglio, sì che la mia scorta
27  mi disse: “Ancor se' tu de li altri sciocchi?

25  Truly I wept, leaning upon a peak
26  Of the hard crag, so that my Escort said
27  To me: "Art thou, too, of the other fools?

28  Qui vive la pietà quand' è ben morta;
29  chi è più scellerato che colui
30  che al giudicio divin passion comporta?

28  Here pity lives when it is wholly dead;
29  Who is a greater reprobate than he
30  Who feels compassion at the doom divine?

31  Drizza la testa, drizza, e vedi a cui
32  s'aperse a li occhi d'i Teban la terra;
33  per ch'ei gridavan tutti: 'Dove rui,

31  Lift up, lift up thy head, and see for whom
32  Opened the earth before the Thebans' eyes;
33  Wherefore they all cried: 'Whither rushest thou,

34  Anfïarao? perché lasci la guerra?'
35  E non restò di ruinare a valle
36  fino a Minòs che ciascheduno afferra.

34  Amphiaraus? Why dost leave the war?'
35  And downward ceased he not to fall amain
36  As far as Minos, who lays hold on all.

37  Mira c'ha fatto petto de le spalle;
38  perché volse veder troppo davante,
39  di retro guarda e fa retroso calle.

37  See, he has made a bosom of his shoulders!
38  Because he wished to see too far before him
39  Behind he looks, and backward goes his way:

40  Vedi Tiresia, che mutò sembiante
41  quando di maschio femmina divenne,
42  cangiandosi le membra tutte quante;

40  Behold Tiresias, who his semblance changed,
41  When from a male a female he became,
42  His members being all of them transformed;

43  e prima, poi, ribatter li convenne
44  li duo serpenti avvolti, con la verga,
45  che rïavesse le maschili penne.

43  And afterwards was forced to strike once more
44  The two entangled serpents with his rod,
45  Ere he could have again his manly plumes.

46  Aronta è quel ch'al ventre li s'atterga,
47  che ne' monti di Luni, dove ronca
48  lo Carrarese che di sotto alberga,

46  That Aruns is, who backs the other's belly,
47  Who in the hills of Luni, there where grubs
48  The Carrarese who houses underneath,

49  ebbe tra ' bianchi marmi la spelonca
50  per sua dimora; onde a guardar le stelle
51  e 'l mar non li era la veduta tronca.

49  Among the marbles white a cavern had
50  For his abode; whence to behold the stars
51  And sea, the view was not cut off from him.

52  E quella che ricuopre le mammelle,
53  che tu non vedi, con le trecce sciolte,
54  e ha di là ogne pilosa pelle,

52  And she there, who is covering up her breasts,
53  Which thou beholdest not, with loosened tresses,
54  And on that side has all the hairy skin,

55  Manto fu, che cercò per terre molte;
56  poscia si puose là dove nacqu' io;
57  onde un poco mi piace che m'ascolte.

55  Was Manto, who made quest through many lands,
56  Afterwards tarried there where I was born;
57  Whereof I would thou list to me a little.

58  Poscia che 'l padre suo di vita uscìo
59  e venne serva la città di Baco,
60  questa gran tempo per lo mondo gio.

58  After her father had from life departed,
59  And the city of Bacchus had become enslaved,
60  She a long season wandered through the world.

61  Suso in Italia bella giace un laco,
62  a piè de l'Alpe che serra Lamagna
63  sovra Tiralli, c'ha nome Benaco.

61  Above in beauteous Italy lies a lake
62  At the Alp's foot that shuts in Germany
63  Over Tyrol, and has the name Benaco.

64  Per mille fonti, credo, e più si bagna
65  tra Garda e Val Camonica e Pennino
66  de l'acqua che nel detto laco stagna.

64  By a thousand springs, I think, and more, is bathed,
65  'Twixt Garda and Val Camonica, Pennino,
66  With water that grows stagnant in that lake.

67  Loco è nel mezzo là dove 'l trentino
68  pastore e quel di Brescia e 'l veronese
69  segnar poria, s'e' fesse quel cammino.

67  Midway a place is where the Trentine Pastor,
68  And he of Brescia, and the Veronese
69  Might give his blessing, if he passed that way.

70  Siede Peschiera, bello e forte arnese
71  da fronteggiar Bresciani e Bergamaschi,
72  ove la riva 'ntorno più discese.

70  Sitteth Peschiera, fortress fair and strong,
71  To front the Brescians and the Bergamasks,
72  Where round about the bank descendeth lowest.

73  Ivi convien che tutto quanto caschi
74  ciò che 'n grembo a Benaco star non può,
75  e fassi fiume giù per verdi paschi.

73  There of necessity must fall whatever
74  In bosom of Benaco cannot stay,
75  And grows a river down through verdant pastures.

76  Tosto che l'acqua a correr mette co,
77  non più Benaco, ma Mencio si chiama
78  fino a Govèrnol, dove cade in Po.

76  Soon as the water doth begin to run,
77  No more Benaco is it called, but Mincio,
78  Far as Governo, where it falls in Po.

79  Non molto ha corso, ch'el trova una lama,
80  ne la qual si discende e la 'mpaluda;
81  e suol di state talor esser grama.

79  Not far it runs before it finds a plain
80  In which it spreads itself, and makes it marshy,
81  And oft 'tis wont in summer to be sickly.

82  Quindi passando la vergine cruda
83  vide terra, nel mezzo del pantano,
84  sanza coltura e d'abitanti nuda.

82  Passing that way the virgin pitiless
83  Land in the middle of the fen descried,
84  Untilled and naked of inhabitants;

85  Lì, per fuggire ogne consorzio umano,
86  ristette con suoi servi a far sue arti,
87  e visse, e vi lasciò suo corpo vano.

85  There to escape all human intercourse,
86  She with her servants stayed, her arts to practise
87  And lived, and left her empty body there.

88  Li uomini poi che 'ntorno erano sparti
89  s'accolsero a quel loco, ch'era forte
90  per lo pantan ch'avea da tutte parti.

88  The men, thereafter, who were scattered round,
89  Collected in that place, which was made strong
90  By the lagoon it had on every side;

91  Fer la città sovra quell' ossa morte;
92  e per colei che 'l loco prima elesse,
93  Mantüa l'appellar sanz' altra sorte.

91  They built their city over those dead bones,
92  And, after her who first the place selected,
93  Mantua named it, without other omen.

94  Già fuor le genti sue dentro più spesse,
95  prima che la mattia da Casalodi
96  da Pinamonte inganno ricevesse.

94  Its people once within more crowded were,
95  Ere the stupidity of Casalodi
96  From Pinamonte had received deceit.

97  Però t'assenno che, se tu mai odi
98  originar la mia terra altrimenti,
99  la verità nulla menzogna frodi.”

97  Therefore I caution thee, if e'er thou hearest
98  Originate my city otherwise,
99  No falsehood may the verity defraud."

100  E io: “Maestro, i tuoi ragionamenti
101  mi son sì certi e prendon sì mia fede,
102  che li altri mi sarien carboni spenti.

100  And I: "My Master, thy discourses are
101  To me so certain, and so take my faith,
102  That unto me the rest would be spent coals.

103  Ma dimmi, de la gente che procede,
104  se tu ne vedi alcun degno di nota;
105  ché solo a ciò la mia mente rifiede.”

103  But tell me of the people who are passing,
104  If any one note-worthy thou beholdest,
105  For only unto that my mind reverts."

106  Allor mi disse: “Quel che da la gota
107  porge la barba in su le spalle brune,
108  fu – quando Grecia fu di maschi vòta,

106  Then said he to me: "He who from the cheek
107  Thrusts out his beard upon his swarthy shoulders
108  Was, at the time when Greece was void of males,

109  sì ch'a pena rimaser per le cune –
110  augure, e diede 'l punto con Calcanta
111  in Aulide a tagliar la prima fune.

109  So that there scarce remained one in the cradle,
110  An augur, and with Calchas gave the moment,
111  In Aulis, when to sever the first cable.

112  Euripilo ebbe nome, e così 'l canta
113  l'alta mia tragedìa in alcun loco:
114  ben lo sai tu che la sai tutta quanta.

112  Eryphylus his name was, and so sings
113  My lofty Tragedy in some part or other;
114  That knowest thou well, who knowest the whole of it.

115  Quell' altro che ne' fianchi è così poco,
116  Michele Scotto fu, che veramente
117  de le magiche frode seppe 'l gioco.

115  The next, who is so slender in the flanks,
116  Was Michael Scott, who of a verity
117  Of magical illusions knew the game.

118  Vedi Guido Bonatti; vedi Asdente,
119  ch'avere inteso al cuoio e a lo spago
120  ora vorrebbe, ma tardi si pente.

118  Behold Guido Bonatti, behold Asdente,
119  Who now unto his leather and his thread
120  Would fain have stuck, but he too late repents.

121  Vedi le triste che lasciaron l'ago,
122  la spuola e 'l fuso, e fecersi 'ndivine;
123  fecer malie con erbe e con imago.

121  Behold the wretched ones, who left the needle,
122  The spool and rock, and made them fortune-tellers;
123  They wrought their magic spells with herb and image.

124  Ma vienne omai, ché già tiene 'l confine
125  d'amendue li emisperi e tocca l'onda
126  sotto Sobilia Caino e le spine;

124  But come now, for already holds the confines
125  Of both the hemispheres, and under Seville
126  Touches the ocean-wave, Cain and the thorns,

127  e già iernotte fu la luna tonda:
128  ben ten de' ricordar, ché non ti nocque
129  alcuna volta per la selva fonda.”

127  And yesternight the moon was round already;
128  Thou shouldst remember well it did not harm thee
129  From time to time within the forest deep."

130  Sì mi parlava, e andavamo introcque.

130  Thus spake he to me, and we walked the while.

Canto XXI
What should we say about this canto, which starts with a withholding of information about what has been said, the things that the protagonists speak of which is excluded from the domain of a poem that is otherwise encyclopedic?  Everything in this canto is a lie, told by malicious liars who delight in deception, demons who torment grifters, with a sticky, opaque, burning  pitch, wherein they are submerged like boiling hunks of meat in a toxic stew.  And what is strange, what is funny, peculiar and horrifying is that the punishers, the demons, are by all appearances, delighted with their own viciousness.  The punishers are enthusiastic, and most alacritous in their duties.  Compare them to the rather extended snippet of the Viniziani repairing and refitting ships at the beginning of the canto.  The dock workers disappear into their tasks, their division of labor, as Marx later so angrily and eloquently pointed out, deprives them of any personality, whereas the demon Malebranche are each individualized by their names.  The question that has haunted me in this canto is just this: Is evil motivated not by necessity, but by fun, is the zest of inflicting pain an inherent attribute of the cosmos itself, the universe delighting perhaps more in inflicting suffering, then in extending the joys of life?  The miraculous obscurity referred to at the beginning of this canto (mirabilmente oscura) is a horrifying, and yet strangely compelling peering into a pitchy mystery that I think we really do not want to clarify.  We don't want to know what's down there in the depths of these verses' implications.  But there is clearly something about ourselves, as readers, and in Dante, as a poet, that uses a distraction side-step into laughter, so that we may only obliquely see what is being both hidden and revealed in this canto.  And this distraction, or any distraction is quite risky, as we see when Dante the poet gets lost in the rather prosaic description of the Venetians shipyard workers, and does not notice that a demon carrying a skewered sinner is rushing down on him.

Finally, I would like to introduce a compositional and a cognitive aspect of perception.  And that is the framing of various superimposed tableaus.  The tableaux of the landscape of the this fifth pouch of the eighth circle, the tableaux of the crucifixion of Christ, the tableaux of the organization of the Venetians shipyard workers, and the military organization of the demons, the tableaux of the dogs attacking a beggar (an intruder, as our the protagonists here), and the tableaux of the surrendering soldiers, moving unarmed through the ranks of their armed enemies, the tableaux of the Church and icons of Lucca, and the barraters of Lucca — all these are like semi-transparent sheets one lying atop the other, but aspects of one or the other arising like the marks of a fluid palimpsest rising to the surface to leave its impression on the reader/observer/listener before they sink down again in the boiling fluid of an aroused awareness.  The first demon encountered is a vivid example of this technique which runs not only throughout this canto, but throughout the whole of the Commedia.  This demon can be alternately and eventually simultaneously viewed as a demon carrying a sinner, a butcher carrying a carcass, Christ carrying a lamb, the cross carrying the crucified Christ, the Madonna holding the corpse of her son.  Many commentators have pointed out how irony dominates this canto, irony being a form of indirect speech, which only partially hides what it overtly attempts to conceal — a kind of form of linguistic fraud.  And what could be more ironic than how Dante's style in this canto embodies the very sin he is trying both to hide and expose.
   
1  Così di ponte in ponte, altro parlando
2  che la mia comedìa cantar non cura,
3  venimmo; e tenavamo 'l colmo, quando

1  From bridge to bridge thus, speaking other things
2  Of which my Comedy cares not to sing,
3  We came along, and held the summit, when

4  restammo per veder l'altra fessura
5  di Malebolge e li altri pianti vani;
6  e vidila mirabilmente oscura.

4  We halted to behold another fissure
5  Of Malebolge and other vain laments;
6  And I beheld it marvellously dark.

7  Quale ne l'arzanà de' Viniziani
8  bolle l'inverno la tenace pece
9  a rimpalmare i legni lor non sani,

7  As in the Arsenal of the Venetians
8  Boils in the winter the tenacious pitch
9  To smear their unsound vessels o'er again,

10  ché navicar non ponno – in quella vece
11  chi fa suo legno novo e chi ristoppa
12  le coste a quel che più vïaggi fece;

10  For sail they cannot; and instead thereof
11  One makes his vessel new, and one recaulks
12  The ribs of that which many a voyage has made;

13  chi ribatte da proda e chi da poppa;
14  altri fa remi e altri volge sarte;
15  chi terzeruolo e artimon rintoppa –:

13  One hammers at the prow, one at the stern,
14  This one makes oars, and that one cordage twists,
15  Another mends the mainsail and the mizzen;

16  tal, non per foco ma per divin' arte,
17  bollia là giuso una pegola spessa,
18  che 'nviscava la ripa d'ogne parte.

16  Thus, not by fire, but by the art divine,
17  Was boiling down below there a dense pitch
18  Which upon every side the bank belimed.

19  I' vedea lei, ma non vedëa in essa
20  mai che le bolle che 'l bollor levava,
21  e gonfiar tutta, e riseder compressa.

19  I saw it, but I did not see within it
20  Aught but the bubbles that the boiling raised,
21  And all swell up and resubside compressed.

22  Mentr' io là giù fisamente mirava,
23  lo duca mio, dicendo “Guarda, guarda!”
24  mi trasse a sé del loco dov' io stava.

22  The while below there fixedly I gazed,
23  My Leader, crying out: "Beware, beware!"
24  Drew me unto himself from where I stood.

25  Allor mi volsi come l'uom cui tarda
26  di veder quel che li convien fuggire
27  e cui paura sùbita sgagliarda,

25  Then I turned round, as one who is impatient
26  To see what it behoves him to escape,
27  And whom a sudden terror doth unman,

28  che, per veder, non indugia 'l partire:
29  e vidi dietro a noi un diavol nero
30  correndo su per lo scoglio venire.

28  Who, while he looks, delays not his departure;
29  And I beheld behind us a black devil,
30  Running along upon the crag, approach.

31  Ahi quant' elli era ne l'aspetto fero!
32  e quanto mi parea ne l'atto acerbo,
33  con l'ali aperte e sovra i piè leggero!

31  Ah, how ferocious was he in his aspect!
32  And how he seemed to me in action ruthless,
33  With open wings and light upon his feet!

34  L'omero suo, ch'era aguto e superbo,
35  carcava un peccator con ambo l'anche,
36  e quei tenea de' piè ghermito 'l nerbo.

34  His shoulders, which sharp-pointed were and high,
35  A sinner did encumber with both haunches,
36  And he held clutched the sinews of the feet.

37  Del nostro ponte disse: “O Malebranche,
38  ecco un de li anzïan di Santa Zita!
39  Mettetel sotto, ch'i' torno per anche

37  From off our bridge, he said: "O Malebranche,
38  Behold one of the elders of Saint Zita;
39  Plunge him beneath, for I return for others

40  a quella terra, che n'è ben fornita:
41  ogn' uom v'è barattier, fuor che Bonturo;
42  del no, per li denar, vi si fa ita.”

40  Unto that town, which is well furnished with them.
41  All there are barrators, except Bonturo;
42  No into Yes for money there is changed."

43  Là giù 'l buttò, e per lo scoglio duro
44  si volse; e mai non fu mastino sciolto
45  con tanta fretta a seguitar lo furo.

43  He hurled him down, and over the hard crag
44  Turned round, and never was a mastiff loosened
45  In so much hurry to pursue a thief.

46  Quel s'attuffò, e tornò sù convolto;
47  ma i demon che del ponte avean coperchio,
48  gridar: “Qui non ha loco il Santo Volto!

46  The other sank, and rose again face downward;
47  But the demons, under cover of the bridge,
48  Cried: "Here the Santo Volto has no place!

49  qui si nuota altrimenti che nel Serchio!
50  Però, se tu non vuo' di nostri graffi,
51  non far sopra la pegola soverchio.”

49  Here swims one otherwise than in the Serchio;
50  Therefore, if for our gaffs thou wishest not,
51  Do not uplift thyself above the pitch."

52  Poi l'addentar con più di cento raffi,
53  disser: “Coverto convien che qui balli,
54  sì che, se puoi, nascosamente accaffi.”

52  They seized him then with more than a hundred rakes;
53  They said: "It here behoves thee to dance covered,
54  That, if thou canst, thou secretly mayest pilfer."

55  Non altrimenti i cuoci a' lor vassalli
56  fanno attuffare in mezzo la caldaia
57  la carne con li uncin, perché non galli.

55  Not otherwise the cooks their scullions make
56  Immerse into the middle of the caldron
57  The meat with hooks, so that it may not float.

58  Lo buon maestro “Acciò che non si paia
59  che tu ci sia,” mi disse, “giù t'acquatta
60  dopo uno scheggio, ch'alcun schermo t'aia;

58  Said the good Master to me: "That it be not
59  Apparent thou art here, crouch thyself down
60  Behind a jag, that thou mayest have some screen;

61  e per nulla offension che mi sia fatta,
62  non temer tu, ch'i' ho le cose conte,
63  per ch'altra volta fui a tal baratta.”

61  And for no outrage that is done to me
62  Be thou afraid, because these things I know,
63  For once before was I in such a scuffle."

64  Poscia passò di là dal co del ponte;
65  e com' el giunse in su la ripa sesta,
66  mestier li fu d'aver sicura fronte.

64  Then he passed on beyond the bridge's head,
65  And as upon the sixth bank he arrived,
66  Need was for him to have a steadfast front.

67  Con quel furore e con quella tempesta
68  ch'escono i cani a dosso al poverello
69  che di sùbito chiede ove s'arresta,

67  With the same fury, and the same uproar,
68  As dogs leap out upon a mendicant,
69  Who on a sudden begs, where'er he stops,

70  usciron quei di sotto al ponticello,
71  e volser contra lui tutt' i runcigli;
72  ma el gridò: “Nessun di voi sia fello!

70  They issued from beneath the little bridge,
71  And turned against him all their grappling-irons;
72  But he cried out: "Be none of you malignant!

73  Innanzi che l'uncin vostro mi pigli,
74  traggasi avante l'un di voi che m'oda,
75  e poi d'arruncigliarmi si consigli.”

73  Before those hooks of yours lay hold of me,
74  Let one of you step forward, who may hear me,
75  And then take counsel as to grappling me."

76  Tutti gridaron: “Vada Malacoda!”;
77  per ch'un si mosse – e li altri stetter fermi –
78  e venne a lui dicendo: “Che li approda?”

76  They all cried out: "Let Malacoda go;"
77  Whereat one started, and the rest stood still,
78  And he came to him, saying: "What avails it?"

79  “Credi tu, Malacoda, qui vedermi
80  esser venuto,” disse 'l mio maestro,
81  “sicuro già da tutti vostri schermi,

79  "Thinkest thou, Malacoda, to behold me
80  Advanced into this place," my Master said,
81  "Safe hitherto from all your skill of fence,

82  sanza voler divino e fato destro?
83  Lascian' andar, ché nel cielo è voluto
84  ch'i' mostri altrui questo cammin silvestro.”

82  Without the will divine, and fate auspicious?
83  Let me go on, for it in Heaven is willed
84  That I another show this savage road."

85  Allor li fu l'orgoglio sì caduto,
86  ch'e' si lasciò cascar l'uncino a' piedi,
87  e disse a li altri: “Omai non sia feruto.”

85  Then was his arrogance so humbled in him,
86  That he let fall his grapnel at his feet,
87  And to the others said: "Now strike him not."

88  E 'l duca mio a me: “O tu che siedi
89  tra li scheggion del ponte quatto quatto,
90  sicuramente omai a me ti riedi.”

88  And unto me my Guide: "O thou, who sittest
89  Among the splinters of the bridge crouched down,
90  Securely now return to me again."

91  Per ch'io mi mossi e a lui venni ratto;
92  e i diavoli si fecer tutti avanti,
93  sì ch'io temetti ch'ei tenesser patto;

91  Wherefore I started and came swiftly to him;
92  And all the devils forward thrust themselves,
93  So that I feared they would not keep their compact.

94  così vid' ïo già temer li fanti
95  ch'uscivan patteggiati di Caprona,
96  veggendo sé tra nemici cotanti.

94  And thus beheld I once afraid the soldiers
95  Who issued under safeguard from Caprona,
96  Seeing themselves among so many foes.


97  I' m'accostai con tutta la persona
98  lungo 'l mio duca, e non torceva li occhi
99  da la sembianza lor ch'era non buona.

97  Close did I press myself with all my person
98  Beside my Leader, and turned not mine eyes
99  From off their countenance, which was not good.

100  Ei chinavan li raffi e “Vuo' che 'l tocchi,”
101  diceva l'un con l'altro, “in sul groppone?”
102  E rispondien: “Si, fa che gliel' accocchi.”

100  They lowered their rakes, and "Wilt thou have me hit him,"
101  They said to one another, "on the rump?"
102  And answered: "Yes; see that thou nick him with it."

103  Ma quel demonio che tenea sermone
104  col duca mio, si volse tutto presto
105  e disse: “Posa, posa, Scarmiglione!”

103  But the same demon who was holding parley
104  With my Conductor turned him very quickly,
105  And said: "Be quiet, be quiet, Scarmiglione;"

106  Poi disse a noi: “Più oltre andar per questo
107  iscoglio non si può, però che giace
108  tutto spezzato al fondo l'arco sesto.

106  Then said to us: "You can no farther go
107  Forward upon this crag, because is lying
108  All shattered, at the bottom, the sixth arch.

109  E se l'andare avante pur vi piace,
110  andatevene su per questa grotta;
111  presso è un altro scoglio che via face.

109  And if it still doth please you to go onward,
110  Pursue your way along upon this rock;
111  Near is another crag that yields a path.

112  Ier, più oltre cinqu' ore che quest' otta,
113  mille dugento con sessanta sei
114  anni compié che qui la via fu rottas

112  Yesterday, five hours later than this hour,
113  One thousand and two hundred sixty-six
114  Years were complete, that here the way was broken.

115  Io mando verso là di questi miei
116  a riguardar s'alcun se ne sciorina;
117  gite con lor, che non saranno rei.”

115  I send in that direction some of mine
116  To see if any one doth air himself;
117  Go ye with them; for they will not be vicious.

118  “Tra'ti avante, Alichino, e Calcabrina,”
119  cominciò elli a dire, “e tu, Cagnazzo;
120  e Barbariccia guidi la decina.

118  Step forward, Alichino and Calcabrina,"
119  Began he to cry out, "and thou, Cagnazzo;
120  And Barbariccia, do thou guide the ten.

121  Libicocco vegn' oltre e Draghignazzo,
122  Cirïatto sannuto e Graffiacane
123  e Farfarello e Rubicante pazzo.

121  Come forward, Libicocco and Draghignazzo,
122  And tusked Ciriatto and Graffiacane,
123  And Farfarello and mad Rubicante;

124  Cercate 'ntorno le boglienti pane;
125  ostor sian salvi infino a l'altro scheggio
126  che tutto intero va sovra le tane.”

124  Search ye all round about the boiling pitch;
125  Let these be safe as far as the next crag,
126  That all unbroken passes o'er the dens."

127  “Omè, maestro, che è quel ch'i' veggio?”
128  diss' io, “deh, sanza scorta andianci soli,
129  se tu sa' ir; ch'i' per me non la cheggio.

127  "O me! what is it, Master, that I see?
128  Pray let us go," I said, "without an escort,
129  If thou knowest how, since for myself I ask none.

130  Se tu se' sì accorto come suoli,
131  non vedi tu ch'e' digrignan li denti
132  e con le ciglia ne minaccian duoli?”

130  If thou art as observant as thy wont is,
131  Dost thou not see that they do gnash their teeth,
132  And with their brows are threatening woe to us?"

133  Ed elli a me: “Non vo' che tu paventi;
134  lasciali digrignar pur a lor senno,
135  ch'e' fanno ciò per li lessi dolenti.”

133  And he to me: "I will not have thee fear;
134  Let them gnash on, according to their fancy,
135  Because they do it for those boiling wretches."

136  Per l'argine sinistro volta dienno;
137  ma prima avea ciascun la lingua stretta
138  coi denti, verso lor duca, per cenno;

136  Along the left-hand dike they wheeled about;
137  But first had each one thrust his tongue between
138  His teeth towards their leader for a signal;

139  ed elli avea del cul fatto trombetta.

139  And he had made a trumpet of his rump.

Canto XXII
Is it possible to form a community whose connective tissue is deceit, each member motivated by a shared desire to do his fellow denizens harm?  The first simile of an army responding with a kind of coordinated automaticity, each soldier responding in a preconditioned way to the trigger of a signal, a fart, a trumpet, a drum, a pulse, a word, the whole arc of their association moving towards destruction: muster, attack, escape.  Here, in the Inferno, there is always as much madness in Dante's procedures as there is method, and the Demons in their military organization, are bound together, it seems, by a desire to do harm, if not to the sinners, then to one another.  Dante is showing us how situations with such an underlying motivation, are always on the verge of disintegration, and that to be armed with malevolence is be the torturer of oneself.  Caimpolo, the grifter, has fallen below even the baseness of the demons, and he tells of the agreement of his fellow sufferers, to signal (again with the signally, the trigger event that leads to pain), when the demons are approaching, so that they may escape their barbs, and escape back into lesser pain.  But Ciampolo intends to use this signal to escape in a deceitful matter, namely, as a way to summon forth new victims for his persecutors, and thereby escape punishment himself.   As dolphins, or as frogs, the sinners have attempted to adapt themselves to the element of their own torment, and throughout this canto, there is yet another kind of submersion: namely a submersion in the signal of a name.  Dante makes a point of naming, and the names border on nonsense, that yet give a sort of bitter aftertaste, an exterior label, which hides a poison.  The touch at the end, as Dante and Virgil escape this collective madness by rather anonymously sneaking away (Ciampolo does not ask who Dante and Virgil are, does not ask, as previous sinners have done, who they are, or what their names might be) is quietly masterful.  Far from being assertive, or seeking "fame", they make themselves unobtrusive, and by so doing, in this instance, escape infamy.     

1  Io vidi già cavalier muover campo,
2  e cominciare stormo e far lor mostra,
3  e talvolta partir per loro scampo;

I have erewhile seen horsemen moving camp,
Begin the storming, and their muster make,
And sometimes starting off for their escape;

4  corridor vidi per la terra vostra,
5  o Aretini, e vidi gir gualdane,
6  fedir torneamenti e correr giostra;

4  Vaunt-couriers have I seen upon your land,
5  O Aretines, and foragers go forth,
6  Tournaments stricken, and the joustings run,



7  quando con trombe, e quando con campane,
8  con tamburi e con cenni di castella,
9  e con cose nostrali e con istrane;

7  Sometimes with trumpets and sometimes with bells,
8  With kettle-drums, and signals of the castles,
9  And with our own, and with outlandish things,

10  né già con sì diversa cennamella
11  cavalier vidi muover né pedoni,
12  né nave a segno di terra o di stella.

10  But never yet with bagpipe so uncouth
11  Did I see horsemen move, nor infantry,
12  Nor ship by any sign of land or star.

13  Noi andavam con li diece demoni.
14  Ahi fiera compagnia! ma ne la chiesa
15  coi santi, e in taverna coi ghiottoni.

13  We went upon our way with the ten demons;
14  Ah, savage company! but in the church
15  With saints, and in the tavern with the gluttons!

16  Pur a la pegola era la mia 'ntesa,
17  per veder de la bolgia ogne contegno
18  e de la gente ch'entro v'era incesa.

16  Ever upon the pitch was my intent,
17  To see the whole condition of that Bolgia,
18  And of the people who therein were burned.

19  Come i dalfini, quando fanno segno
20  a' marinar con l'arco de la schiena
21  che s'argomentin di campar lor legno,

19  Even as the dolphins, when they make a sign
20  To mariners by arching of the back,
21  That they should counsel take to save their vessel,

22  talor così, ad alleggiar la pena,
23  mostrav' alcun de' peccatori 'l dosso
24  e nascondea in men che non balena.

22  Thus sometimes, to alleviate his pain,
23  One of the sinners would display his back,
24  And in less time conceal it than it lightens.

25  E come a l'orlo de l'acqua d'un fosso
26  stanno i ranocchi pur col muso fuori,
27  sì che celano i piedi e l'altro grosso,

25  As on the brink of water in a ditch
26  The frogs stand only with their muzzles out,
27  So that they hide their feet and other bulk,

28  sì stavan d'ogne parte i peccatori;
29  ma come s'appressava Barbariccia,
30  così si ritraén sotto i bollori.

28  So upon every side the sinners stood;
29  But ever as Barbariccia near them came,
30  Thus underneath the boiling they withdrew.

31  I' vidi, e anco il cor me n'accapriccia,
32  uno aspettar così, com' elli 'ncontra
33  ch'una rana rimane e l'altra spiccia;

31  I saw, and still my heart doth shudder at it,
32  One waiting thus, even as it comes to pass
33  One frog remains, and down another dives;

34  e Graffiacan, che li era più di contra,
35  li arruncigliò le 'mpegolate chiome
36  e trassel sù, che mi parve una lontra.

34  And Graffiacan, who most confronted him,
35  Grappled him by his tresses smeared with pitch,
36  And drew him up, so that he seemed an otter.

37  I' sapea già di tutti quanti 'l nome,
38  sì li notai quando fuorono eletti,
39  e poi ch'e' si chiamaro, attesi come.

37  I knew, before, the names of all of them,
38  So had I noted them when they were chosen,
39  And when they called each other, listened how.

40  “O Rubicante, fa che tu li metti
41  li unghioni a dosso, sì che tu lo scuoi!”
42  gridavan tutti insieme i maladetti.

40  "O Rubicante, see that thou do lay
41  Thy claws upon him, so that thou mayst flay him,"
42  Cried all together the accursed ones.

43  E io: “Maestro mio, fa, se tu puoi,
44  che tu sappi chi è lo sciagurato
45  venuto a man de li avversari suoi.”

43  And I: "My Master, see to it, if thou canst,
44  That thou mayst know who is the luckless wight,
45  Thus come into his adversaries' hands."

46  Lo duca mio li s'accostò allato;
47  domandollo ond' ei fosse, e quei rispuose:
48  “I' fui del regno di Navarra nato.

46  Near to the side of him my Leader drew,
47  Asked of him whence he was; and he replied:
48  "I in the kingdom of Navarre was born;

49  Mia madre a servo d'un segnor mi puose,
50  che m'avea generato d'un ribaldo,
51  distruggitor di sé e di sue cose.

49  My mother placed me servant to a lord,
50  For she had borne me to a ribald knave,
51  Destroyer of himself and of his things.

52  Poi fui famiglia del buon re Tebaldo;
53  quivi mi misi a far baratteria,
54  di ch'io rendo ragione in questo caldo.”

52  Then I domestic was of good King Thibault;
53  I set me there to practise barratry,
54  For which I pay the reckoning in this heat."

55  E Cirïatto, a cui di bocca uscia
56  d'ogne parte una sanna come a porco,
57  li fé sentir come l'una sdruscia.

55  And Ciriatto, from whose mouth projected,
56  On either side, a tusk, as in a boar,
57  Caused him to feel how one of them could rip.

58  Tra male gatte era venuto 'l sorco;
59  ma Barbariccia il chiuse con le braccia
60  e disse: “State in là, mentr' io lo 'nforco.”

58  Among malicious cats the mouse had come;
59  But Barbariccia clasped him in his arms,
60  And said: "Stand ye aside, while I enfork him."

61  E al maestro mio volse la faccia;
62  “Domanda,” disse, “ancor, se più disii
63  saper da lui, prima ch'altri 'l disfaccia.”

61  And to my Master he turned round his head;
62  "Ask him again," he said, "if more thou wish
63  To know from him, before some one destroy him."

64  Lo duca dunque: “Or dì: de li altri rii
65  conosci tu alcun che sia latino
66  sotto la pece?” E quelli: “I' mi partii,

64  The Guide: "Now tell then of the other culprits;
65  Knowest thou any one who is a Latian,
66  Under the pitch?" And he: "I separated

67  poco è, da un che fu di là vicino.
68  Così foss' io ancor con lui coperto,
69  ch'i' non temerei unghia né uncino!”

67  Lately from one who was a neighbour to it;
68  Would that I still were covered up with him,
69  For I should fear not either claw nor hook!"

70  E Libicocco “Troppo avem sofferto,”
71  disse; e preseli 'l braccio col runciglio,
72  sì che, stracciando, ne portò un lacerto.

70  And Libicocco: "We have borne too much;"
71  And with his grapnel seized him by the arm,
72  So that, by rending, he tore off a tendon.


73  Draghignazzo anco i volle dar di piglio
74  giuso a le gambe; onde 'l decurio loro
75  si volse intorno intorno con mal piglio.

73  Eke Draghignazzo wished to pounce upon him
74  Down at the legs; whence their Decurion
75  Turned round and round about with evil look.

76  Quand' elli un poco rappaciati fuoro,
77  a lui, ch'ancor mirava sua ferita,
78  domandò 'l duca mio sanza dimoro:

76  When they again somewhat were pacified,
77  Of him, who still was looking at his wound,
78  Demanded my Conductor without stay:

79  “Chi fu colui da cui mala partita
80  di' che facesti per venire a proda?”
81  Ed ei rispuose: “Fu frate Gomita,

79  "Who was that one, from whom a luckless parting
80  Thou sayest thou hast made, to come ashore?"
81  And he replied: "It was the Friar Gomita,

82  quel di Gallura, vasel d'ogne froda,
83  ch'ebbe i nemici di suo donno in mano,
84  e fé sì lor, che ciascun se ne loda.

82  He of Gallura, vessel of all fraud,
83  Who had the enemies of his Lord in hand,
84  And dealt so with them each exults thereat;

85  Danar si tolse e lasciolli di piano,
86  sì com' e' dice; e ne li altri offici anche
87  barattier fu non picciol, ma sovrano.

85  Money he took, and let them smoothly off,
86  As he says; and in other offices
87  A barrator was he, not mean but sovereign.

88  Usa con esso donno Michel Zanche
89  di Logodoro; e a dir di Sardigna
90  le lingue lor non si sentono stanche.

88  Foregathers with him one Don Michael Zanche
89  Of Logodoro; and of Sardinia
90  To gossip never do their tongues feel tired.

91  Omè, vedete l'altro che digrigna;
92  i' direi anche, ma i' temo ch'ello
93  non s'apparecchi a grattarmi la tigna.”

91  O me! see that one, how he grinds his teeth;
92  Still farther would I speak, but am afraid
93  Lest he to scratch my itch be making ready."

94  E 'l gran proposto, vòlto a Farfarello
95  che stralunava li occhi per fedire,
96  disse: “Fatti 'n costà, malvagio uccello!”

94  And the grand Provost, turned to Farfarello,
95  Who rolled his eyes about as if to strike,
96  Said: "Stand aside there, thou malicious bird."

97  “Se voi volete vedere o udire,”
98  ricominciò lo spaürato appresso,
99  “Toschi o Lombardi, io ne farò venire;

97  "If you desire either to see or hear,"
98  The terror-stricken recommenced thereon,
99  "Tuscans or Lombards, I will make them come.

100  ma stieno i Malebranche un poco in cesso,
101  sì ch'ei non teman de le lor vendette;
102  e io, seggendo in questo loco stesso

100  But let the Malebranche cease a little,
101  So that these may not their revenges fear,
102  And I, down sitting in this very place,

103  per un ch'io son, ne farò venir sette
104  quand' io suffolerò, com' è nostro uso
105  di fare allor che fori alcun si mette.”

103  For one that I am will make seven come,
104  When I shall whistle, as our custom is
105  To do whenever one of us comes out."

106  Cagnazzo a cotal motto levò 'l muso,
107  crollando 'l capo, e disse: “Odi malizia
108  ch'elli ha pensata per gittarsi giuso!”

106  Cagnazzo at these words his muzzle lifted,
107  Shaking his head, and said: "Just hear the trick
108  Which he has thought of, down to throw himself!"

109  Ond' ei, ch'avea lacciuoli a gran divizia,
110  rispuose: “Malizioso son io troppo,
111  quand' io procuro a' mia maggior trestizia.”

109  Whence he, who snares in great abundance had,
110  Responded: "I by far too cunning am,
111  When I procure for mine a greater sadness."

112  Alichin non si tenne e, di rintoppo
113  a li altri, disse a lui: “Se tu ti cali,
114  io non ti verrò dietro di gualoppo,

112  Alichin held not in, but running counter
113  Unto the rest, said to him: "If thou dive,
114  I will not follow thee upon the gallop,

115  ma batterò sovra la pece l'ali.
116  Lascisi 'l collo, e sia la ripa scudo,
117  a veder se tu sol più di noi vali.”

115  But I will beat my wings above the pitch;
116  The height be left, and be the bank a shield
117  To see if thou alone dost countervail us."

118  O tu che leggi, udirai nuovo ludo:
119  ciascun da l'altra costa li occhi volse,
120  quel prima, ch'a ciò fare era più crudo.

118  O thou who readest, thou shalt hear new sport!
119  Each to the other side his eyes averted;
120  He first, who most reluctant was to do it.

121  Lo Navarrese ben suo tempo colse;
122  fermò le piante a terra, e in un punto
123  saltò e dal proposto lor si sciolse.

121  The Navarrese selected well his time;
122  Planted his feet on land, and in a moment
123  Leaped, and released himself from their design.

124  Di che ciascun di colpa fu compunto,
125  ma quei più che cagion fu del difetto;
126  però si mosse e gridò: “Tu se' giunto!”

124  Whereat each one was suddenly stung with shame,
125  But he most who was cause of the defeat;
126  Therefore he moved, and cried: "Thou art o'ertaken."

127  Ma poco i valse: ché l'ali al sospetto
128  non potero avanzar; quelli andò sotto,
129  e quei drizzò volando suso il petto:

127  But little it availed, for wings could not
128  Outstrip the fear; the other one went under,
129  And, flying, upward he his breast directed;

130  non altrimenti l'anitra di botto,
131  quando 'l falcon s'appressa, giù s'attuffa,
132  ed ei ritorna sù crucciato e rotto.

130  Not otherwise the duck upon a sudden
131  Dives under, when the falcon is approaching,
132  And upward he returneth cross and weary.

133  Irato Calcabrina de la buffa,
134  volando dietro li tenne, invaghito
135  che quei campasse per aver la zuffa;

133  Infuriate at the mockery, Calcabrina
134  Flying behind him followed close, desirous
135  The other should escape, to have a quarrel.

136  e come 'l barattier fu disparito,
137  così volse li artigli al suo compagno,
138  e fu con lui sopra 'l fosso ghermito.

136  And when the barrator had disappeared,
137  He turned his talons upon his companion,
138  And grappled with him right above the moat.

139  Ma l'altro fu bene sparvier grifagno
140  ad artigliar ben lui, e amendue
141  cadder nel mezzo del bogliente stagno.

139  But sooth the other was a doughty sparhawk
140  To clapperclaw him well; and both of them
141  Fell in the middle of the boiling pond.

142  Lo caldo sghermitor sùbito fue;
143  ma però di levarsi era neente,
144  sì avieno inviscate l'ali sue.

142  A sudden intercessor was the heat;
143  But ne'ertheless of rising there was naught,
144  To such degree they had their wings belimed.

145  Barbariccia, con li altri suoi dolente,
146  quattro ne fé volar da l'altra costa
147  con tutt' i raffi, e assai prestamente

145  Lamenting with the others, Barbariccia
146  Made four of them fly to the other side
147  With all their gaffs, and very speedily

148  di qua, di là discesero a la posta;
149  porser li uncini verso li 'mpaniati,
150  ch'eran già cotti dentro da la crosta.

148  This side and that they to their posts descended;
149  They stretched their hooks towards the pitch-ensnared,
150  Who were already baked within the crust,

151  E noi lasciammo lor così 'mpacciati.

151  And in this manner busied did we leave them.

Canto XXIII
If there were tempo and dynamic markings for the first 57 lines of Canto XXIII they might be pianissimo, lento, then an introverted agitato, then a prestissimo forte, and finally a return to pianissimo.  Of course, what is moving, is not so much sound, but the metasound of the imagination (and that word is much in evidence at the beginning of this canto), a kind of movement of mind or spirit alone.  Of note here is that so much of the canto is devoted to the escape from the squadron of demons in the 5th pouch of the 8th circle to the 6th.  The beginning also emphasizes the mental, emotional, and physical rapport between the protagonists: they are literally as close as a mother and her fetus, and this first "escape" section has a wonderful pairing of metaphors, first of flame, as a picture is painted of a mother rescuing her child from flames, and then to water that douses those metaphoric flames as the movement of the poets is described as the swift, slickness of water sluicing off mill wheels — Masterful.

There is no denying that the whole of the Commedia offers a dazzling spectacle for the visual imagination, and this canto, of all the canto's of the Inferno, is the most dazzling while at the same time the most grotesque, because the glitter that commands our attention is only the thinnest veneer hiding an abject misery.  Sinners, moving so slowly in pairs, they scares seem to me moving at all, but rather form an rather Egyptian frieze wherein gold mantled monks shuffle by, their faces bejeweled with the wet and crust of tears — one imagines a red glint of Hell flashing and dancing along these golden, sparkling surfaces and one imagines the inner shock to an outward beauty so thoroughly deceitful.  The foil of the previous canto with its black pitch, red flames, and furious motion is the setting for this amulet of hypocrisy, and one could hardly imagine a better one.  One imagines too the black devil Malebranche mashing up suddenly against this utterly alien world of this pouch of malebolge like so many mosquitoes mashing up against a glass window pain, the dream has changed, and the nightmare entities whose home is in one area of the unconscious cannot manifest themselves in another area.  The worlds of the hypocrites and the grifters could not be more different — yet it must be remembered, that both are in Hell, and as such their foundation is torment for tormentors: all the sinners suffer the fates which they have inflicted on others.

It's about sequences and broken sequences, and about pairing or doubling.  Both sequencing and pairing  will foreground both the differences and similarities, which are much harder to notice when they remain in the background.   The pairing and doubling include —  Canto XXII and Canto XXIII, Dante (the protagonist) and Virgil, the lying of the Malebranche and the sarcasm of the hypocrites, Catalano and Loderingo, outer and inner, substance of thought and the mirror of that thought, and so forth.  Sequencing and chains include — the mouse tied to the frog, and the kite snaring both mouse and frog (a broken chain, as are the bridges that the Malebranche claimed were intact), and the line of hypocrites walking in an unbreakable chain or sequence, or as the text says in line 8 and 9: se ben s'accoppia/principio e fine con la mente fissa (if well we couple end and beginning with a steadfast mind.), and also sequences of thoughts (line 10: E come l'un pensier de l'altro scoppia etc.)  ... But when we sort through all that we come back to sequences of historical events leading up to the crucifixion of Christ and the sequences of poetical events — the journey of Dante and Virgil through the afterworld, and in particular these last few cantos wherein Virgil has shown again and again his shortcomings.

It must be remembered that while there is only one Virgil, there are always two Dantes: Dante the protagonist of the poem, and Dante the poet who has already had the transcendent experience which the protagonist Dante is undergoing.  As first time readers we are in the position of Dante, the protagonist, the aspirant.  We, like the aspirant, are dependent on Virgil, but we have seen him fail at the gates of Dis, we have seen him gullibly accept Malacoda's lie, and we have seen him peeved by Catalano's mockery, and finally we have seen him astonished at Ciaphas' punishment.  All this is subtly pointed out by Dante the poet in the transcendent offing, while Dante's the protagonist is more dependent than ever — he is as close to Virgil as an infant to his mother, Virgil can read his mind, and Dante follows literally in his footsteps ... insight, a move away from this dependence on Virgil's experienced guidance and pagan reasoning, is growing — and this insight is growing because that which is hidden beneath all of Virgil's care and skill is the realization by the aspirant that what is going to drive teacher and chela apart is this difference in worldviews between a wise pagan and an inspired Christian.  In Hell, Virgil is a dominating figure, but he is still a pagan.  Does his astonishment at Ciaphas' punishment arise because Ciaphas belief that it is just (in the sense that it causes, in a Utilitarian Jeremy Bentham sort of way, less overall suffering) that one man should be martyred to save a whole people seems quite reasonable, even correct to the pagan Virgil, while to the Christian Dante this sin is the ultimate sin, i.e., to presume that one can substitute one's one reasonable judgement for the utterly more subtle, complicated, and timeless mysteries of God, to presume that there is a fundamental difference that comes from the sequence of numbers or events and the sufferings of one innocent person (the first and only innocent person in the history of the world).  For Dante the poet, Christ is humanity, but not only humanity, he is Creation and that love which continuously brings creation out of nothing.  At the crucifixion Christ was nothing on the outside (the opposite of the gold/lead clad hypocrites here), naked and suffering, but on the inside He was everything.  To be a true follower of Christ, one accepts everything as one's charge, and everything always boils down to this single act of incarnation, to be an immortal imprisoned in a mortal body, for the sake of all mortal bodies, that is the Christian position.  And Virgil, a believer in the sequence of years in history, feels sorry for himself because he was born too late — but what is too late?  and too late according to whom?  What is growing here is the gap between a pagan belief and Christian belief, a gap which cannot be closed accept by the miracle of grace — and the courage to accept that irrational miracle.       
       
1  Taciti, soli, sanza compagnia
2  n'andavam l'un dinanzi e l'altro dopo,
3  come frati minor vanno per via.

1  Silent, alone, and without company
2  We went, the one in front, the other after,
3  As go the Minor Friars along their way.

4  Vòlt' era in su la favola d'Isopo
5  lo mio pensier per la presente rissa,
6  dov' el parlò de la rana e del topo;

4  Upon the fable of Aesop was directed
5  My thought, by reason of the present quarrel,
6  Where he has spoken of the frog and mouse;

7  ché più non si pareggia “mo” e “issa”
8  che l'un con l'altro fa, se ben s'accoppia
9  principio e fine con la mente fissa.

7  For 'mo' and 'issa' are not more alike
8  Than this one is to that, if well we couple
9  End and beginning with a steadfast mind.

10  E come l'un pensier de l'altro scoppia,
11  così nacque di quello un altro poi,
12  che la prima paura mi fé doppia.

10  And even as one thought from another springs,
11  So afterward from that was born another,
12  Which the first fear within me double made.

13  Io pensava così: “Questi per noi
14  sono scherniti con danno e con beffa
15  sì fatta, ch' assai credo che lor nòi.

13  Thus did I ponder: "These on our account
14  Are laughed to scorn, with injury and scoff
15  So great, that much I think it must annoy them.

16  Se l'ira sovra 'l mal voler s'aggueffa,
17  ei ne verranno dietro più crudeli
18  che 'l cane a quella lievre ch'elli acceffa.”

16  If anger be engrafted on ill-will,
17  They will come after us more merciless
18  Than dog upon the leveret which he seizes,"

19  Già mi sentia tutti arricciar li peli
20  de la paura e stava in dietro intento,
21  quand' io dissi: “Maestro, se non celi

19  I felt my hair stand all on end already
20  With terror, and stood backwardly intent,
21  When said I: "Master, if thou hidest not

22  te e me tostamente, i' ho pavento
23  d'i Malebranche. Noi li avem già dietro;
24  io li 'magino sì, che già li sento.”

22  Thyself and me forthwith, of Malebranche
23  I am in dread; we have them now behind us;
24  I so imagine them, I already feel them."

25  E quei: “S'i' fossi di piombato vetro,
26  l'imagine di fuor tua non trarrei
27  più tosto a me, che quella dentro 'mpetro.

25  And he: "If I were made of leaded glass,
26  Thine outward image I should not attract
27  Sooner to me than I imprint the inner.

28  Pur mo venieno i tuo' pensier tra ' miei,
29  con simile atto e con simile faccia,
30  sì che d'intrambi un sol consiglio fei.

28  Just now thy thoughts came in among my own,
29  With similar attitude and similar face,
30  So that of both one counsel sole I made.

31  S'elli è che sì la destra costa giaccia,
32  che noi possiam ne l'altra bolgia scendere,
33  noi fuggirem l'imaginata caccia.”

31  If peradventure the right bank so slope
32  That we to the next Bolgia can descend,
33  We shall escape from the imagined chase."

34  Già non compié di tal consiglio rendere,
35  ch'io li vidi venir con l'ali tese
36  non molto lungi, per volerne prendere.

34  Not yet he finished rendering such opinion,
35  When I beheld them come with outstretched wings,
36  Not far remote, with will to seize upon us.

37  Lo duca mio di sùbito mi prese,
38  come la madre ch'al romore è desta
39  e vede presso a sé le fiamme accese,

37  My Leader on a sudden seized me up,
38  Even as a mother who by noise is wakened,
39  And close beside her sees the enkindled flames,

40  che prende il figlio e fugge e non s'arresta,
41  avendo più di lui che di sé cura,
42  tanto che solo una camiscia vesta;

40  Who takes her son, and flies, and does not stop,
41  Having more care of him than of herself,
42  So that she clothes her only with a shift;

43  e giù dal collo de la ripa dura
44  supin si diede a la pendente roccia,
45  che l'un de' lati a l'altra bolgia tura.

43  And downward from the top of the hard bank
44  Supine he gave him to the pendent rock,
45  That one side of the other Bolgia walls.

46  Non corse mai sì tosto acqua per doccia
47  a volger ruota di molin terragno,
48  quand' ella più verso le pale approccia,

46  Ne'er ran so swiftly water through a sluice
47  To turn the wheel of any land-built mill,
48  When nearest to the paddles it approaches,

49  come 'l maestro mio per quel vivagno,
50  portandosene me sovra 'l suo petto,
51  come suo figlio, non come compagno.

49  As did my Master down along that border,
50  Bearing me with him on his breast away,
51  As his own son, and not as a companion.

52  A pena fuoro i piè suoi giunti al letto
53  del fondo giù, ch'e' furon in sul colle
54  sovresso noi; ma non lì era sospetto:

52  Hardly the bed of the ravine below
53  His feet had reached, ere they had reached the hill
54  Right over us; but he was not afraid;

55  ché l'alta provedenza che lor volle
56  porre ministri de la fossa quinta,
57  poder di partirs' indi a tutti tolle.

55  For the high Providence, which had ordained
56  To place them ministers of the fifth moat,
57  The power of thence departing took from all.

58  Là giù trovammo una gente dipinta
59  che giva intorno assai con lenti passi,
60  piangendo e nel sembiante stanca e vinta.

58  A painted people there below we found,
59  Who went about with footsteps very slow,
60  Weeping and in their semblance tired and vanquished.

61  Elli avean cappe con cappucci bassi
62  dinanzi a li occhi, fatte de la taglia
63  che in Clugnì per li monaci fassi.

61  They had on mantles with the hoods low down
62  Before their eyes, and fashioned of the cut
63  That in Cologne they for the monks are made.

64  Di fuor dorate son, sì ch'elli abbaglia;
65  ma dentro tutte piombo, e gravi tanto,
66 che Federigo le mettea di paglia.

64  Without, they gilded are so that it dazzles;
65  But inwardly all leaden and so heavy
66  That Frederick used to put them on of straw.

67  Oh in etterno faticoso manto!
68  Noi ci volgemmo ancor pur a man manca
69  con loro insieme, intenti al tristo pianto;

67  O everlastingly fatiguing mantle!
68  Again we turned us, still to the left hand
69  Along with them, intent on their sad plaint;



70  ma per lo peso quella gente stanca
71  venìa sì pian, che noi eravam nuovi
72  di compagnia ad ogne mover d'anca.

70  But owing to the weight, that weary folk
71  Came on so tardily, that we were new
72  In company at each motion of the haunch.

73  Per ch'io al duca mio: “Fa che tu trovi
74  alcun ch'al fatto o al nome si conosca,
75  e li occhi, sì andando, intorno movi.”

73  Whence I unto my Leader: "See thou find
74  Some one who may by deed or name be known,
75  And thus in going move thine eye about."

76  E un che 'ntese la parola tosca,
77  di retro a noi gridò: “Tenete i piedi,
78  voi che correte sì per l'aura fosca!

76  And one, who understood the Tuscan speech,
77  Cried to us from behind: "Stay ye your feet,
78  Ye, who so run athwart the dusky air!

79  Forse ch'avrai da me quel che tu chiedi.”
80  Onde 'l duca si volse e disse: “Aspetta
81  e poi secondo il suo passo procedi.”

79  Perhaps thou'lt have from me what thou demandest."
80  Whereat the Leader turned him, and said: "Wait,
81  And then according to his pace proceed."

82  Ristetti, e vidi due mostrar gran fretta
83  de l'animo, col viso, d'esser meco;
84  ma tardavali 'l carco e la via stretta.

82  I stopped, and two beheld I show great haste
83  Of spirit, in their faces, to be with me;
84  But the burden and the narrow way delayed them.

85  Quando fuor giunti, assai con l'occhio bieco
86  mi rimiraron sanza far parola;
87  poi si volsero in sé, e dicean seco:

85  When they came up, long with an eye askance
86  They scanned me without uttering a word.
87  Then to each other turned, and said together:

88  “Costui par vivo a l'atto de la gola;
89  e s'e' son morti, per qual privilegio
90  vanno scoperti de la grave stola?”

88  "He by the action of his throat seems living;
89  And if they dead are, by what privilege
90  Go they uncovered by the heavy stole?"

91  Poi disser me: “O Tosco, ch'al collegio
92  de l'ipocriti tristi se' venuto,
93  dir chi tu se' non avere in dispregio.”

91  Then said to me: "Tuscan, who to the college
92  Of miserable hypocrites art come,
93  Do not disdain to tell us who thou art."

94  E io a loro: “I' fui nato e cresciuto
95  sovra 'l bel fiume d'Arno a la gran villa,
96  e son col corpo ch'i' ho sempre avuto.

94  And I to them: "Born was I, and grew up
95  In the great town on the fair river of Arno,
96  And with the body am I've always had.

97  Ma voi chi siete, a cui tanto distilla
98  quant' i' veggio dolor giù per le guance?
99  e che pena è in voi che sì sfavilla?”

97  But who are ye, in whom there trickles down
98  Along your cheeks such grief as I behold?
99  And what pain is upon you, that so sparkles?"

100  E l'un rispuose a me: “Le cappe rance
101  son di piombo sì grosse, che li pesi
102  fan così cigolar le lor bilance.

100  And one replied to me: "These orange cloaks
101  Are made of lead so heavy, that the weights
102  Cause in this way their balances to creak.

103  Frati godenti fummo, e bolognesi;
104  io Catalano e questi Loderingo
105  nomati, e da tua terra insieme presi

103  Frati Gaudenti were we, and Bolognese;
104  I Catalano, and he Loderingo
105  Named, and together taken by thy city,

106  come suole esser tolto un uom solingo,
107  per conservar sua pace; e fummo tali,
108  ch'ancor si pare intorno dal Gardingo.”

106  As the wont is to take one man alone,
107  For maintenance of its peace; and we were such
108  That still it is apparent round Gardingo."

109  Io cominciai: “O frati, i vostri mali...”;
110  ma più non dissi, ch'a l'occhio mi corse
111 un, crucifisso in terra con tre pali.

109  "O Friars," began I, "your iniquitous. . ."
110  But said no more; for to mine eyes there rushed
111  One crucified with three stakes on the ground.

112  Quando mi vide, tutto si distorse,
113  soffiando ne la barba con sospiri;
114  e 'l frate Catalan, ch'a ciò s'accorse,

112  When me he saw, he writhed himself all over,
113  Blowing into his beard with suspirations;
114  And the Friar Catalan, who noticed this,

115  mi disse: “Quel confitto che tu miri,
116  consigliò i Farisei che convenia
117  porre un uom per lo popolo a' martìri.

115  Said to me: "This transfixed one, whom thou seest,
116  Counselled the Pharisees that it was meet
117  To put one man to torture for the people.

118  Attraversato è, nudo, ne la via,
119  come tu vedi, ed è mestier ch'el senta
120  qualunque passa, come pesa, pria.

118  Crosswise and naked is he on the path,
119  As thou perceivest; and he needs must feel,
120  Whoever passes, first how much he weighs;

121  E a tal modo il socero si stenta
122  in questa fossa, e li altri dal concilio
123  che fu per li Giudei mala sementa.”

121  And in like mode his father-in-law is punished
122  Within this moat, and the others of the council,
123  Which for the Jews was a malignant seed."

124  Allor vid' io maravigliar Virgilio
125  sovra colui ch'era disteso in croce
126  tanto vilmente ne l'etterno essilio

124  And thereupon I saw Virgilius marvel
125  O'er him who was extended on the cross
126  So vilely in eternal banishment.

127  Poscia drizzò al frate cotal voce:
128  “Non vi dispiaccia, se vi lece, dirci
129  s'a la man destra giace alcuna foce

127  Then he directed to the Friar this voice:
128  "Be not displeased, if granted thee, to tell us
129  If to the right hand any pass slope down

130  onde noi amendue possiamo uscirci,
131  sanza costrigner de li angeli neri
132  che vegnan d'esto fondo a dipartirci.”

130  By which we two may issue forth from here,
131  Without constraining some of the black angels
132  To come and extricate us from this deep."

133  Rispuose adunque: “Più che tu non speri
134  s'appressa un sasso che da la gran cerchia
135  si move e varca tutt' i vallon feri,

133  Then he made answer: "Nearer than thou hopest
134  There is a rock, that forth from the great circle
135  Proceeds, and crosses all the cruel valleys,

136  salvo che 'n questo è rotto e nol coperchia;
137  montar potrete su per la ruina,
138  che giace in costa e nel fondo soperchia.”

136  Save that at this 'tis broken, and does not bridge it;
137  You will be able to mount up the ruin,
138  That sidelong slopes and at the bottom rises."

139  Lo duca stette un poco a testa china;
140  poi disse: “Mal contava la bisogna
141  colui che i peccator di qua uncina.”

139  The Leader stood awhile with head bowed down;
140  Then said: "The business badly he recounted
141  Who grapples with his hook the sinners yonder."

142  E 'l frate: “Io udi' già dire a Bologna
143  del diavol vizi assai, tra ' quali udi'
144  ch'elli è bugiardo e padre di menzogna.”

142  And the Friar: "Many of the Devil's vices
143  Once heard I at Bologna, and among them,
144  That he's a liar and the father of lies."

145  Appresso il duca a gran passi sen gì,
146  turbato un poco d'ira nel sembiante;
147  ond' io da li 'ncarcati mi parti'

145  Thereat my Leader with great strides went on,
146  Somewhat disturbed with anger in his looks;
147  Whence from the heavy-laden I departed

148  dietro a le poste de le care piante.

149  After the prints of his beloved feet.

Canto XXIV
Metamorphosis
These first 18 lines of Canto 24 are so lucid on their surface, such an apparently simple and straight forward simile that it is easy to pass over their astonishing — almost paralyzing depth and complexity.  Armies of brilliant commentators have combed over the Commedia for 800 years and they have yet to fully explicate exactly how Dante has done what he has done — and they never will.  Why?  Because he has captured that phenomenon of language which physicists have also noticed from another end of the cosmic spectrum.  Namely, that the universe behaves like a language and language behaves like the universe.  How do we even start to talk about this?  I have been thinking of this complexity as various frames or cellular modules of activity superimposed upon one another in a way that depends upon, yet masks, the connections between them.  

IN quella parte del giovanetto anno ... if there is an "in" there must also be an "out" so that is a big frame.

QUELLA PARTE (that part) ... if there is "that part" there must also be a "whole".

GIOVANETTO (young) ... if there is a "young" there must be an "old".

I CRIN (locks of hair) ... a human understanding of a celestial phenomenon, that is, the frame of "human life" as a mirror of cosmic phenomena. 

HAIR — RAYS — TEMPERED ... if something is "tempered" there must also be a "full" expression, the idea of growth and development, another fundamental frame.

L'AQUARIO ... the water bearer (earth/water/flow), the celestial stars, the zodiacal sphere, waters of earth, blood, the idea of movement, solution and dissolution, Earth waters and heavenly fire, the movement of imagination from mechanical processes to beings, entities, the anthropomorphizing of cosmic energies: we are the stars, they are our larger selves.  The rivers of Hell, which we have been following all along, and which are tangentially referred to later in the Canto when Vanni Fucci says (line 122) I piovvi di Toscana — I rained down from Tuscany.

E GIÀ LE NOTTI AL MEZZO DÌ SEN VANNO ... the oscillation of dark and light as a sentient movement, the days' lightbeings already have gone to devour almost half the nightbeings, the idea of natural metamorphoses as a journey.  

Now imagine that the brain — your brain — in order to understand these words must make a journey

from part to whole
from young to old
from years to eternity
from unmeasured darkness to measured light (from nights to days)
from heaven above to Earth below
from process to being
from cosmos to human

all the while as you do this, various parts of the brain are lighting up, these lines not only telling you what time it is (narrative to metaphor) but how language works as an analogic replica of how Time itself functions.

Notice too the vast spatial and temporal scales involves as we go down to the minute thickness of a hair or a sunray and up to the immense, immemorial revolutions of the Zodiac — but still almost nothing of human life, human history, just these vast frames in which the human drama unfolds.  And that's just the frames of reference in the first three lines!

Then the simile continues with winter/spring/ white/green (and we recall the reviving of Dante's hopes from Inferno Canto II when the frost blights and the sun revives) and we now have in line 5 the idea of family, and the Church, a "white sister", and of writing, and of the ephemeralness of the written word, of fame (think of Keats: a name writ on water), and then we come to the shepherd, his nakedness (sexuality, vulnerability, ignorance, disappointment) who slaps his thigh in frustration (the thwarting of human will by Divine fiat).  He leaves, returns, goes out, comes into the house, he has gone from sleeping to waking, from lying down to rising, and then after the passage of an hour (time molecularized in a smaller sphere), he looks out to see that the frost has disappeared and he can lead his sheep to pasture.  So we have the good shepherd, and the Biblical references which that idea entails.  He has a shepard's hook, like a bishop, but the hook is to control the sheep — the idea of obedience — and to fend off wolves — the idea of weapon and the idea of enemy.  The frames are stacking up, one atop the other, and the grounds of experience are densifying.  

Now we come to Virgil’s visage, at first troubled (disturbed), then sweet (like fruit), and the words faccia "to do" becomes faccia "face", a face whose disturbance first wounds, and whose transformation to hope, applies a healing plaster (the imprint of the writing of the frost revived, but now in a different sense, as words that give succor, as the melting frost gives succor to the fields, and grass.

We have read — or travelled — a mere 18 lines, but what a journey it has been! and I have only touched upon a very few of the many associations that run rampant around these sounds, nor have I mentioned the interweaving of the sounds themselves.

Now let us look at the simile as a whole, and think about a couple of ways that it could be interpreted.  Let Virgil's frown allude to the frost, let Dante be the humble wretch, let the reader be the sheep.  Or let the devil's deception be the frost, the discouraged Virgil (from finding the bridge to the next pouch destroyed) the humble wretch, and Dante the sheep.  

Recall now, in Inferno, Canto IV on Lust, how the metaphor of the birds evolved from a swirling flock, to line of cranes, to a pair of turtle doves, and now see here how this entire simile evolves and harks back to the frozen plant in Canto II, and foreshadows the frozen lake at the end of the Inferno.  Of course, one could argue, that this is simply how language works — and it is — but what a feat Dante is accomplishing in his poetry to capture this essence of complexity, since we could go on and on and on finding more and more connections and associations, and in fact, the rest of the canto, which, let us remember, is about metamorphosis, it's serpentine subtilty, it's density of interweavings, does exactly that.

If you could see an MRI of your brain now, it would show all kinds of connections, all their original fire, all their afterglow.  And, if you had been reading this aloud, in Dante's Italian, your larynx would be vibrating and your breath would be orchestrated to a multitude of vibrations flowing throughout your body.  Your cerebral spinal fluid would be pulsing (as the spinal chord is almost wrapped round by the larynx) and Candice Pert's so-called molecules of emotion, i.e. certain neuro-transmitters, would be infusing your gut, heart, and skin with that whole panoply of motions which we grossly summerize as mood.  You would in fact be in an altered state, the complexity of which would be in analogic synchronization with the poetry.  Your very neuronal physiology would be metamorphosing, and in some sense, you would be entrained, not just with Dante's words, but with the phenomenon of language itself, the phenomenon of the universe. 

In this pouch of the eighth circle, the bodies of the sinners suffer a physical devolution, which has a spiritual purpose.  We can speculate on what that purpose might be upon the basis of what the text presents, and that speculation might be quite different than whatever Dante had in mind — but our speculation can still be valid as long as the text supports our provisional conclusions.  I say provisional because no finality can ever be definitively arrived at, as the exercise above demonstrates.  I would say that the kinds of metamorphosis that the text tells of have about them a kind of shorthand tour of what happens to the body after death, the invasion of the human form by deadly serpents (worms/maggots).  Do these forms attack the body, or do they arise as the true vision of mere physical function, like the exposure of the intestines, as the serpents arise from the body around the reins or kidneys?  These are like giant worms or maggots, and whatever human shape that body might have had, they prove that in the case of these malicious thieves that human-seeming shape had always been a fraud.  Vanni Fucci and all his ilk are not guided by any precept other than their own appetites, they are in fact parasitical worms, vampires who both feed on the human form, and also use that form as a deceitful disguise to deceive others.  In brief, the serpents that appear to be devouring them are also their true selves, not only in life, but here in death, where their bodies are transmogrified, fall to ashes, as if struck by the serpent tongue of lightning, and rise again to repeat the process.  One feels that the text here, with the broken bridge, is very much like one of those autoimmune diseases in which the connective tissue becomes diseased and instead of making the body coherent and mobile, attack that coherence and utterly destroy it, as if we witnessed in a second some form of ALS that reduces the body to ashes, but only to have it reform in a moment and repeat this same agonizing cycle.  Note too, that it is when the aspirant Dante is trying to deceive Virgil into believing that he has more breath and strength than he actually has — that it is in that precise moment that the voice of Vanni Fucci is heard — a kindred spirit in deceit and a kindred spirit in his Tuscan accent.  The irony is rich at this moment when Dante, the aspirant, asks Virgil to stop so that Dante can discover more of the incoherent voice (note that) which angrily accosts him.  Then in a lengthy assent about silent and immediate obedience, Virgil displays anything but silence by his very praise of the quality.  That the canto should end with the malicious prophecy that Vanni Fucci makes about Dante's political fortunes, we see that this shade maintains his own torment by being tormenting.  It's true that in an aside, the aspirant, stands amazed at God's power to punish, but as contemporary readers, we may say that there is an automaticity involved in Vanni Fucci's fate, just as there is an automaticity in the body's putrefaction after death.  One could even say that Vanni Fucci's fate is simply the fate of the decaying body, and if one does no soul building during life, than one automatically suffers this fate because one has in a sense only stolen a human form capable of moral choices and creativity, only stolen what is sacred, and by this form of wastage may no longer transfigure the mortal sufferer into a blissful immortality, but may only perpetuate the cycle of death. 

1  In quella parte del giovanetto anno
2  che 'l sole i crin sotto l'Aquario tempra
3  e già le notti al mezzo dì sen vanno,

1  In that part of the youthful year wherein
2  The Sun his locks beneath Aquarius tempers,
3  And now the nights draw near to half the day,

4  quando la brina in su la terra assempra
5  l'imagine di sua sorella bianca,
6  ma poco dura a la sua penna tempra,

4  What time the hoar-frost copies on the ground
5  The outward semblance of her sister white,
6  But little lasts the temper of her pen,

7  lo villanello a cui la roba manca,
8  si leva, e guarda, e vede la campagna
9  biancheggiar tutta; ond' ei si batte l'anca,

The husbandman, whose forage faileth him,
Rises, and looks, and seeth the champaign
All gleaming white, whereat he beats his flank,

10  ritorna in casa, e qua e là si lagna,
11  come 'l tapin che non sa che si faccia;
12  poi riede, e la speranza ringavagna,

10  Returns in doors, and up and down laments,
11  Like a poor wretch, who knows not what to do;
12  Then he returns and hope revives again,

13  veggendo 'l mondo aver cangiata faccia
14  in poco d'ora, e prende suo vincastro
15  e fuor le pecorelle a pascer caccia.

13  Seeing the world has changed its countenance
14  In little time, and takes his shepherd's crook,
15  And forth the little lambs to pasture drives.

16  Così mi fece sbigottir lo mastro
17  quand' io li vidi sì turbar la fronte,
18  e così tosto al mal giunse lo 'mpiastro;

16  Thus did the Master fill me with alarm,
17  When I beheld his forehead so disturbed,
18  And to the ailment came as soon the plaster.

19  ché, come noi venimmo al guasto ponte,
20  lo duca a me si volse con quel piglio
21  dolce ch'io vidi prima a piè del monte.

19  For as we came unto the ruined bridge,
20  The Leader turned to me with that sweet look
21  Which at the mountain's foot I first beheld.

22  Le braccia aperse, dopo alcun consiglio
23  eletto seco riguardando prima
24  ben la ruina, e diedemi di piglio.

22  His arms he opened, after some advisement
23  Within himself elected, looking first
24  Well at the ruin, and laid hold of me.

25  E come quei ch'adopera ed estima,
26  che sempre par che 'nnanzi si proveggia,
27  così, levando me sù ver' la cima

25  And even as he who acts and meditates,
26  For aye it seems that he provides beforehand,
27  So upward lifting me towards the summit

28  d'un ronchione, avvisava un'altra scheggia
29  dicendo: “Sovra quella poi t'aggrappa;
30  ma tenta pria s'è tal ch'ella ti reggia.”

28  Of a huge rock, he scanned another crag,
29  Saying: "To that one grapple afterwards,
30  But try first if 'tis such that it will hold thee."

31  Non era via da vestito di cappa,
32  ché noi a pena, ei lieve e io sospinto,
33  potavam sù montar di chiappa in chiappa.

31  This was no way for one clothed with a cloak;
32  For hardly we, he light, and I pushed upward,
33  Were able to ascend from jag to jag.

34  E se non fosse che da quel precinto
35  più che da l'altro era la costa corta,
36  non so di lui, ma io sarei ben vinto.

34  And had it not been, that upon that precinct
35  Shorter was the ascent than on the other,
36  He I know not, but I had been dead beat.

37  Ma perché Malebolge inver' la porta
38  del bassissimo pozzo tutta pende,
39  lo sito di ciascuna valle porta

37  But because Malebolge tow'rds the mouth
38  Of the profoundest well is all inclining,
39  The structure of each valley doth import

40  che l'una costa surge e l'altra scende;
41  noi pur venimmo al fine in su la punta
42  onde l'ultima pietra si scoscende.

40  That one bank rises and the other sinks.
41  Still we arrived at length upon the point
42  Wherefrom the last stone breaks itself asunder.

43  La lena m'era del polmon sì munta
44  quand'io fui sù, ch'i' non potea più oltre,
45  anzi m'assisi ne la prima giunta.

43  The breath was from my lungs so milked away,
44  When I was up, that I could go no farther,
45  Nay, I sat down upon my first arrival.

46  “Omai convien che tu così ti spoltre,”
47  disse 'l maestro; “ché, seggendo in piuma,
48  in fama non si vien, né sotto coltre;

46  "Now it behoves thee thus to put off sloth,"
47  My Master said; "for sitting upon down,
48  Or under quilt, one cometh not to fame,

49  sanza la qual chi sua vita consuma,
50  cotal vestigio in terra di sé lascia,
51  qual fummo in aere e in acqua la schiuma.

49  Withouten which whoso his life consumes
50  Such vestige leaveth of himself on earth,
51  As smoke in air or in the water foam.

52  E però leva sù; vinci l'ambascia
53  con l'animo che vince ogne battaglia,
54  se col suo grave corpo non s'accascia.

52  And therefore raise thee up, o'ercome the anguish
53  With spirit that o'ercometh every battle,
54  If with its heavy body it sink not.

55  Più lunga scala convien che si saglia;
56  non basta da costoro esser partito.
57  Se tu mi 'ntendi, or fa sì che ti vaglia.”

55  A longer stairway it behoves thee mount;
56  Tis not enough from these to have departed;
57  Let it avail thee, if thou understand me."

58  Leva'mi allor, mostrandomi fornito
59  meglio di lena ch'i'non mi sentia,
60  e dissi: “Va, ch'i' son forte e ardito.”

58  Then I uprose, showing myself provided
59  Better with breath than I did feel myself,
60  And said: "Go on, for I am strong and bold."

61  Su per lo scoglio prendemmo la via,
62  ch'era ronchioso, stretto e malagevole,
63  ed erto più assai che quel di pria.

61  Upward we took our way along the crag,
62  Which jagged was, and narrow, and difficult,
63  And more precipitous far than that before.

64  Parlando andava per non parer fievole;
65  onde una voce uscì de l'altro fosso,
66  a parole formar disconvenevole.

64  Speaking I went, not to appear exhausted;
65  Whereat a voice from the next moat came forth,
66  Not well adapted to articulate words.

67  Non so che disse, ancor che sovra 'l dosso
68  fossi de l'arco già che varca quivi;
69  ma chi parlava ad ire parea mosso.

67  I know not what it said, though o'er the back
68  I now was of the arch that passes there;
69  But he seemed moved to anger who was speaking.

70  Io era vòlto in giù, ma li occhi vivi
71  non poteano ire al fondo per lo scuro;
72  per ch'io: “Maestro, fa che tu arrivi

70  I was bent downward, but my living eyes
71  Could not attain the bottom, for the dark;
72  Wherefore I: "Master, see that thou arrive

73  da l'altro cinghio e dismontiam lo muro;
74  ché, com' i' odo quinci e non intendo,
75  così giù veggio e neente affiguro.”

73  At the next round, and let us descend the wall;
74  For as from hence I hear and understand not,
75  So I look down and nothing I distinguish."

76  “Altra risposta,” disse, “non ti rendo
77  se non lo far; ché la dimanda onesta
78  si de' seguir con l'opera tacendo.”

76  "Other response," he said, "I make thee not,
77  Except the doing; for the modest asking
78  Ought to be followed by the deed in silence."

79  Noi discendemmo il ponte de la testa
80  dove s'aggiugne con l'ottava ripa,
81  e poi mi fu la bolgia manifesta:

79  We from the bridge descended at its head,
80  Where it connects itself with the eighth bank,
81  And then was manifest to me the Bolgia;

82  e vidivi entro terrible stipa
83  di serpenti, e di sì diversa mena
84  che la memoria il sangue ancor mi scipa.

82  And I beheld therein a terrible throng
83  Of serpents, and of such a monstrous kind,
84  That the remembrance still congeals my blood

85  Più non si vanti Libia con sua rena;
86  ché se chelidri, iaculi e faree
87  produce, e cencri con anfisibena,

85  Let Libya boast no longer with her sand;
86  For if Chelydri, Jaculi, and Phareae
87  She breeds, with Cenchri and with Amphisbaena,

88  né tante pestilenzie né sì ree
89  mostrò già mai con tutta l'Etïopia
90  né con ciò che di sopra al Mar Rosso èe.

88  Neither so many plagues nor so malignant
89  E'er showed she with all Ethiopia,
90  Nor with whatever on the Red Sea is!

91  Tra questa cruda e tristissima copia
92  corrëan genti nude e spaventate,
93  sanza sperar pertugio o elitropia:

91  Among this cruel and most dismal throng
92  People were running naked and affrighted.
93  Without the hope of hole or heliotrope.

94  con serpi le man dietro avean legate;
95  quelle ficcavan per le ren la coda
96  e 'l capo, ed eran dinanzi aggroppate.

94  They had their hands with serpents bound behind them;
95  These riveted upon their reins the tail
96  And head, and were in front of them entwined.

97  Ed ecco a un ch'era da nostra proda,
98  s'avventò un serpente che 'l trafisse
99  là dove 'l collo a le spalle s'annoda.

97  And lo! at one who was upon our side
98  There darted forth a serpent, which transfixed him
99  There where the neck is knotted to the shoulders.

100  Né O sì tosto mai né I si scrisse,
101  com' el s'accese e arse, e cener tutto
102  convenne che cascando divenisse;

100  Nor 'O' so quickly e'er, nor 'I' was written,
101  As he took fire, and burned; and ashes wholly
102  Behoved it that in falling he became.

103  e poi che fu a terra sì distrutto,
104  la polver si raccolse per sé stessa
105  e 'n quel medesmo ritornò di butto.

103  And when he on the ground was thus destroyed,
104  The ashes drew together, and of themselves
105  Into himself they instantly returned.

106  Così per li gran savi si confessa
107  che la fenice more e poi rinasce,
108  quando al cinquecentesimo anno appressa;

106  Even thus by the great sages 'tis confessed
107  The phoenix dies, and then is born again,
108  When it approaches its five-hundredth year;

109  erba né biado in sua vita non pasce,
110  ma sol d'incenso lagrime e d'amomo,
111  e nardo e mirra son l'ultime fasce.

109  On herb or grain it feeds not in its life,
110  But only on tears of incense and amomum,
111  And nard and myrrh are its last winding-sheet.

112  E qual è quel che cade, e non sa como,
113  per forza di demon ch'a terra il tira,
114  o d'altra oppilazion che lega l'omo,

112  And as he is who falls, and knows not how,
113  By force of demons who to earth down drag him,
114  Or other oppilation that binds man,

115  quando si leva, che 'ntorno si mira
116  tutto smarrito de la grande angoscia
117  ch'elli ha sofferta, e guardando sospira:

115  When he arises and around him looks,
116  Wholly bewildered by the mighty anguish
117  Which he has suffered, and in looking sighs;

118  tal era 'l peccator levato poscia.
119  Oh potenza di Dio, quant' è severa,
120  che cotai colpi per vendetta croscia!

118  Such was that sinner after he had risen.
119  Justice of God! O how severe it is,
120  That blows like these in vengeance poureth down!

121  Lo duca il domandò poi chi ello era;
122  per ch'ei rispuose: “Io piovvi di Toscana,
123  poco tempo è, in questa gola fiera.

121  The Guide thereafter asked him who he was;
121  Whence he replied: "I rained from Tuscany
122  A short time since into this cruel gorge.

124  Vita bestial mi piacque e non umana,
125  sì come a mul ch'i'fui; son Vanni Fucci
126  bestia, e Pistoia mi fu degna tana.”

124  A bestial life, and not a human, pleased me,
125  Even as the mule I was; I'm Vanni Fucci,
126  Beast, and Pistoia was my worthy den."

127  E ïo al duca: “Dilli che non mucci,
128  e domanda che colpa qua giù 'l pinse;
129  ch'io 'l vidi omo di sangue e di crucci.”

127  And I unto the Guide: "Tell him to stir not,
128  And ask what crime has thrust him here below,
129  For once a man of blood and wrath I saw him."

130  E 'l peccator, che 'ntese, non s'infinse,
131  ma drizzò verso me l'animo e 'l volto,
132  e di trista vergogna si dipinse;

130  And the sinner, who had heard, dissembled not,
131  But unto me directed mind and face,
132  And with a melancholy shame was painted.

133  poi disse: “Più mi duol che tu m'hai colto
134  ne la miseria dove tu mi vedi,
135  che quando fui de l'altra vita tolto.

133  Then said: "It pains me more that thou hast caught me
134  Amid this misery where thou seest me,
135  Than when I from the other life was taken.

136  Io non posso negar quel che tu chiedi;
137  in giù son messo tanto perch'io fui
138  ladro a la sagrestia d'i belli arredi,

136  What thou demandest I cannot deny;
137  So low am I put down because I robbed
138  The sacristy of the fair ornaments,

139  e falsamente già fu apposto altrui.
140  Ma perché di tal vista tu non godi,
141  se mai sarai di fuor da' luoghi bui,

139  And falsely once 'twas laid upon another;
140  But that thou mayst not such a sight enjoy,
141  If thou shalt e'er be out of the dark places,

142  apri li orecchi al mio annunzio, e odi.
143  Pistoia in pria d'i Neri si dimagra;
144  poi Fiorenza rinova gente e modi.

142  Thine ears to my announcement ope and hear:
143  Pistoia first of Neri groweth meagre;
144  Then Florence doth renew her men and manners;

145  Tragge Marte vapor di Val di Magra
146  ch'è di torbidi nuvoli involuto;
147  e con tempesta impetüosa e agra

145  Mars draws a vapour up from Val di Magra,
146  Which is with turbid clouds enveloped round,
147  And with impetuous and bitter tempest

148  sovra Campo Picen fia combattuto;
149  ond'ei repente spezzerà la nebbia,
150  sì ch'ogne Bianco ne sarà feruto.

148  Over Campo Picen shall be the battle;
149  When it shall suddenly rend the mist asunder,
150  So that each Bianco shall thereby be smitten.

151  E detto l'ho perché doler ti debbia!”

151  And this I've said that it may give thee pain."

Canto XXV
Everything is in flux, and yet we persist in seeing everything as dependably solid.   Maybe as infants we see that blurry world before habit has deceived us into thinking that the forms we see, the forms of our own bodies, by a blessèd misperception of the quickness of time, the fickleness of space, are all immutably mutable.  Our bodies are turbines of swarming energies, like swarming bees, which appropriate the energies around us, and the very — albeit temporary — existence of a body with a human form dissipates all the lesser forms in the environment as it gathers substance for its existence.  Here is original sin: In order to maintain our little cosmos, we make the environment we inhabit a chaos.  We are all thieves of life, destined to return that gift of supreme and dynamic organization to the slurry vermiculture of disintegrating corpses, the noisome oviposition sites of flies, and the nursery to hordes of maggots.  We begin with a moral debt, and our further evolution to higher forms depends upon how we settle that debt in all that we relate to ... but how do we do that?  Dante, the poet, is answering that question with negative exemplars all through the aspirant's journey through the Inferno.  The thieves of Canto XXV with their incredible — and Dante goes to great pains in this canto to make the incredible credible — devolution to serpent and reptile forms — show us how that debt is increased, and how the lower forms, or the moral order of the cosmos, take their retribution in the post-mortem dream.  To quote Blake: They became what they beheld.  Worms, snakes, lizards, the bulwarks of form, however repulsive to the human eye, still forestall the utter destruction of the cosmos in the frozen tight heat-death that the readers of the Commedia will encounter soon enough in the very depths of Hell.  That's why, as the text reads in line 4, the serpents are Dante's friends.  

In this canto, we find there is an accumulation of confusion and of Boschean grotesqueness, and as we continue reading, the Inferno that saps our strength, taxes our imagination, challenges us to make sense of how, in our own lives, devolution, dissipation, diversion intrude and break down our firm intentions to accomplish something to justify our existence.  Like Milton's Lucifer, Dante's thief, Vanni Fucci, greets these D-demons by defiance.  His defiance against the very power that has given his existence order and identity shows how depraved he has become, and his defiance speeds up his disintegration, his continued waywardness serving as a catalyst to speed up the time of decay, and to the aspirant's eyes, at least, to almost instantaneously dissolve into serpent forms.  The horror of this devolution gives us pause, and creates a kind of debilitating horror of what we ourselves are constantly becoming as senescence inches us inevitably towards the utter dissolution of bodily death.  In this Canto, more than any other that has gone before, the identities of the sinners are very hard to track, and we have to disentangle them so to speak from the worm wrestle of the narrative, and even if we managed to come up with the names of these sinners, the effort is hardly worth it.  Their names mean nothing, the processes of change that punishes them, that is what we find we are being shown as we probe deeper into the text.  We might ask ourselves: Why this Hell? why post-mortem? why this dream of poetic fiction that purports to be a literal truth? — and these questions hang in the air around us like a perpetual angst, a stench, a round of torments which succeed one another with terrible rapidity.  In the biological realms, this corpse, this thief of life, enters the food chain, and gives rise again to complex forms, the mutations coming in many cycles, whose spirals can go up — as we shall see in the Purgatorio and the Paradiso — as well as down.  But here, and in all the Hell cantos, for the sinners, the perfect conservatives and right-wingers, nothing changes in the cycles themselves, their cosmology is fixed and repetitive, because they have become determined to maintain them just so, in spite of all the pain that leads nowhere but to a repetition.  Their circle of torments is closed and eternal.

Now, however, we come to a curious fact about this text.  The closer we study this disorder, the more we find an underlying order, a kind of cryptological code, that is the excellence of the poetry itself.  Robert Hollander, in the notes to his and Jean Hollander’s translation, presents a tripartite graph.  He shows that there are three types of sinners shown here (Vanni Fucci, Agnello and Cianfa, Buoso and Francesco, each displaying one of three types of transmogrification: Vanni Fucci: resurrection, Agnello and Cianfa: mutation, and Buoso and Francesco: transmutation; each described by three metaphors: Vanni Fucci (in Canto XXIV) by the letters O and I, by the phoenix, and by an epileptic fit; Agnello and Cianfa by ivy on a tree, by hot waxes blending, and by burning parchment; Buoso and Francesco by a lizard on a path, by a person in sleep or fever, and by a snail's horns;  each too are representative of three different kinds of theft, Vanni Fucci, the theft of church property (Aquinas' Sacrilegio); theft of goods commonly held (Aquinas' Peculato), and theft from fellow men (Aquinas' Plagio) theft from one's fellows.  The text's outward chaos emerges from a deeper aesthetic order.  

From the very first too, when Vanni Fucci makes an obscene gesture aimed at the God whom he feels is tormenting him, there is in this canto, to reverse Eliot's phrase, a raid on the articulate.  Dante is showing here his answer to how we escape from the original sin of theft from our environment to feed and maintain ourselves.  And what is that compensation?  Making poetry, making art ... continuing to create higher and more deeply ordered forms outside of physical time and space and their perpetual wranglings of destruction, creation, and ultimate entropically sterile gruel.  

Final note and question: the cosmos must have a shape, and Dante gives it a very precise shape, Ptolemaic in a way, which is now seen as metaphor not cosmology, but that does not negate its purpose for the imagination.  The question is: What is the shape of our contemporary cosmos?  Its internal constants?  The question must remain open as are our current cosmological description of a universe which is exploding without boundaries from a dot of density smaller than the head of a pin and briefer than a moment outside of time, a description, as Terrance McKenna points out, which is far more absurd than any other put forth in the mythologies of any religion or folklore, that is say: the one we cannot imagine, the one we believe.  And isn't it strange, that not seeing the ridiculousness of our beliefs, while denigrating the ridiculousness of these poetic cosmologies, we make of ourselves the most ridiculous of all things: people who laugh at everyone but ourselves.    
    
1  Al fine de le sue parole il ladro
2  le mani alzò con amendue le fiche,
3  gridando: “Togli, Dio, ch'a te le squadro!”

1  At the conclusion of his words, the thief
2  Lifted his hands aloft with both the figs,
3  Crying: "Take that, God, for at thee I aim them."

4  Da indi in qua mi fuor le serpi amiche,
5  perch' una li s'avvolse allora al collo,
6  come dicesse “Non vo' che più diche”;

4  From that time forth the serpents were my friends;
5  For one entwined itself about his neck
6  As if it said: "I will not thou speak more;"

7  e un'altra a le braccia, e rilegollo,
8  ribadendo sé stessa si dinanzi,
9  che non potea con esse dare un crollo.

7  And round his arms another, and rebound him,
8  Clinching itself together so in front,
9  That with them he could not a motion make.

10  Ahi Pistoia, Pistoia, ché non stanzi
11  d'incenerarti sì che più non duri,
12  poi che 'n mal fare il seme tuo avanzi?

10  Pistoia, ah, Pistoia! why resolve not
11  To burn thyself to ashes and so perish,
12  Since in ill-doing thou thy seed excellest?

13  Per tutt' i cerchi de lo 'nferno scuri
14  non vidi spirto in Dio tanto superbo,
15  non quel che cadde a Tebe giù da' muri.

13  Through all the sombre circles of this Hell,
14  Spirit I saw not against God so proud,
15  Not he who fell at Thebes down from the walls!

16  El si fuggì che non parlò più verbo;
17  e io vidi un centauro pien di rabbia
18  venir chiamando: “Ov' è, ov' è l'acerbo?”

16  He fled away, and spake no further word;
17  And I beheld a Centaur full of rage
18  Come crying out: "Where is, where is the scoffer?"

19  Maremma non cred' io che tante n'abbia,
20  quante bisce elli avea su per la groppa
21  infin ove comincia nostra labbia.

19  I do not think Maremma has so many
20  Serpents as he had all along his back,
21  As far as where our countenance begins.

22  Sovra le spalle, dietro da la coppa,
23  con l'ali aperte li giacea un draco;
24  e quello affuoca qualunque s'intoppa.

22  Upon the shoulders, just behind the nape,
23  With wings wide open was a dragon lying,
24  And he sets fire to all that he encounters.

25  Lo mio maestro disse: “Questi è Caco,
26  che, sotto 'l sasso di monte Aventino,
27  di sangue fece spesse volte laco.

25  My Master said: "That one is Cacus, who
26  Beneath the rock upon Mount Aventine
27  Created oftentimes a lake of blood.

28  Non va co' suoi fratei per un cammino,
29  per lo furto che frodolente fece
30  del grande armento ch'elli ebbe a vicino;

28  He goes not on the same road with his brothers,
29  By reason of the fraudulent theft he made
30  Of the great herd, which he had near to him;

31  onde cessar le sue opere biece
32  sotto la mazza d'Ercule, che forse
33  gliene diè cento, e non sentì le diece.”

31  Whereat his tortuous actions ceased beneath
32  The mace of Hercules, who peradventure
33  Gave him a hundred, and he felt not ten."

34  Mentre che sì parlava, ed el trascorse,
35  e tre spiriti venner sotto noi,
36  de' quai né io né 'l duca mio s'accorse,

34  While he was speaking thus, he had passed by,
35  And spirits three had underneath us come,
36  Of which nor I aware was, nor my Leader,

37  se non quando gridar: “Chi siete voi?”
38  per che nostra novella si ristette,
39  e intendemmo pur ad essi poi.

37  Until what time they shouted: "Who are you?"
38  On which account our story made a halt,
39  And then we were intent on them alone.

40  Io non li conoscea; ma ei seguette,
41  come suol seguitar per alcun caso,
42  che l'un nomar un altro convenette,

40  I did not know them; but it came to pass,
41  As it is wont to happen by some chance,
42  That one to name the other was compelled,

43  dicendo: “Cianfa dove fia rimaso?”
44  per ch'io, acciò che 'l duca stesse attento,
45  mi puosi 'l dito su dal mento al naso.

43  Exclaiming: "Where can Cianfa have remained?"
44  Whence I, so that the Leader might attend,
45  Upward from chin to nose my finger laid.

46  Se tu se' or, lettore, a creder lento ciò
47  ch'io dirò, non sarà maraviglia,
48  ché io che 'l vidi, a pena il mi consento.

46  If thou art, Reader, slow now to believe
47  What I shall say, it will no marvel be,
48  For I who saw it hardly can admit it.

49  Com' io tenea levate in lor le ciglia,
50  e un serpente con sei piè si lancia
51  dinanzi a l'uno, e tutto a lui s'appiglia.

49  As I was holding raised on them my brows,
50  Behold! a serpent with six feet darts forth
51  In front of one, and fastens wholly on him.

52  Co' piè di mezzo li avvinse la pancia
53  e con li anterïor le braccia prese;
54  poi li addentò e l'una e l'altra guancia;

52  With middle feet it bound him round the paunch,
53  And with the forward ones his arms it seized;
54  Then thrust its teeth through one cheek and the other;

55  li diretani a le cosce distese,
56  e miseli la coda tra 'mbedue
57  e dietro per le ren sù la ritese.

55  The hindermost it stretched upon his thighs,
56  And put its tail through in between the two,
57  And up behind along the reins outspread it.

58  Ellera abbarbicata mai non fue
59  ad alber si, come l'orribil fiera
60  per l'altrui membra avviticchiò le sue.

58  Ivy was never fastened by its barbs
59  Unto a tree so, as this horrible reptile
60  Upon the other's limbs entwined its own.

61  Poi s'appiccar, come di calda cera
62  fossero stati, e mischiar lor colore,
63  né l'un né l'altro già parea quel ch'era:

61  Then they stuck close, as if of heated wax
62  They had been made, and intermixed their colour;
63  Nor one nor other seemed now what he was;

64  come procede innanzi da l'ardore,
65  per lo papiro suso, un color bruno
66  che non è nero ancora e 'l bianco more.

64  E'en as proceedeth on before the flame
65  Upward along the paper a brown colour,
66  Which is not black as yet, and the white dies.

67  Li altri due 'l riguardavano, e ciascuno
68  gridava: “Omè, Agnel, come ti muti!
69  Vedi che già non se' né due né uno.”

67  The other two looked on, and each of them
68  Cried out: "O me, Agnello, how thou changest!
69  Behold, thou now art neither two nor one."

70  Già eran li due capi un divenuti,
71  quando n'apparver due figure miste
72  in una faccia, ov' eran due perduti.

70  Already the two heads had one become,
71  When there appeared to us two figures mingled
73  Into one face, wherein the two were lost.

73  Fersi le braccia due di quattro liste;
74  le cosce con le gambe e 'l ventre e 'l casso
75  divenner membra che non fuor mai viste.

73  Of the four lists were fashioned the two arms,
74  The thighs and legs, the belly and the chest
75  Members became that never yet were seen.

76  Ogne primaio aspetto ivi era casso:
77  due e nessun l'imagine perversa
78  parea; e tal sen gio con lento passo.

76  Every original aspect there was cancelled;
77  Two and yet none did the perverted image
78  Appear, and such departed with slow pace.

79  Come 'l ramarro sotto la gran fersa
80  dei dì canicular, cangiando sepe,
81  folgore par se la via attraversa,

79  Even as a lizard, under the great scourge
80  Of days canicular, exchanging hedge,
81  Lightning appeareth if the road it cross;

82  sì pareva, venendo verso l'epe
83  de li altri due, un serpentello acceso,
84  livido e nero come gran di pepe;

82  Thus did appear, coming towards the bellies
83  Of the two others, a small fiery serpent,
84  Livid and black as is a peppercorn.

85  e quella parte onde prima è preso
86  nostro alimento, a l'un di lor trafisse;
87  poi cadde giuso innanzi lui disteso.

85  And in that part whereat is first received
86  Our aliment, it one of them transfixed;
87  Then downward fell in front of him extended.

88  Lo trafitto 'l mirò, ma nulla disse;
89  anzi, co' piè fermati, sbadigliava
90  pur come sonno o febbre l'assalisse.

88  The one transfixed looked at it, but said naught;
89  Nay, rather with feet motionless he yawned,
90  Just as if sleep or fever had assailed him.

91  Elli 'l serpente e quei lui riguardava;
92  l'un per la piaga e l'altro per la bocca
93  fummavan forte, e 'l fummo si scontrava.

91  He at the serpent gazed, and it at him;
92  One through the wound, the other through the mouth
93  Smoked violently, and the smoke commingled.

94  Taccia Lucano omai là dov' e' tocca
95  del misero Sabello e di Nasidio,
96  e attenda a udir quel ch'or si scocca.

94  Henceforth be silent Lucan, where he mentions
95  Wretched Sabellus and Nassidius,
96  And wait to hear what now shall be shot forth.

97  Taccia di Cadmo e d'Aretusa Ovidio,
98  ché se quello in serpente e quella in fonte
99  converte poetando, io non lo 'nvidio;

97  Be silent Ovid, of Cadmus and Arethusa;
98  For if him to a snake, her to fountain,
99  Converts he fabling, that I grudge him not;

100  ché due nature mai a fronte a fronte
101  non trasmutò sì ch'amendue le forme
102  a cambiar lor matera fosser pronte

100  Because two natures never front to front
101  Has he transmuted, so that both the forms
102  To interchange their matter ready were.

103  Insieme si rispuosero a tai norme,
104  che 'l serpente la coda in forca fesse,
105  e 'l feruto ristrinse insieme l'orme.

103  Together they responded in such wise,
104  That to a fork the serpent cleft his tail,
105  And eke the wounded drew his feet together.

106  Le gambe con le cosce seco stesse
107  s'appiccar sì, che 'n poco la giuntura
108  non facea segno alcun che si paresse.

106  The legs together with the thighs themselves
107  Adhered so, that in little time the juncture
108  No sign whatever made that was apparent.

109  Togliea la coda fessa la figura
110  che si perdeva là, e la sua pelle
111  si facea molle, e quella di là dura.

109  He with the cloven tail assumed the figure
110  The other one was losing, and his skin
111  Became elastic, and the other's hard.

112  Io vidi intrar le braccia per l'ascelle,
113  e i due piè de la fiera, ch'eran corti,
114  tanto allungar quanto accorciavan quelle.

112  I saw the arms draw inward at the armpits,
113  And both feet of the reptile, that were short,
114  Lengthen as much as those contracted were.

115  Poscia li piè di rietro, insieme attorti,
116  diventaron lo membro che l'uom cela,
117  e 'l misero del suo n'avea due porti.

115  Thereafter the hind feet, together twisted,
116  Became the member that a man conceals,
117  And of his own the wretch had two created.

118  Mentre che 'l fummo l'uno e l'altro vela
119  di color novo, e genera 'l pel suso
120  per l'una parte e da l'altra il dipela,

118  While both of them the exhalation veils
119  With a new colour, and engenders hair
120  On one of them and depilates the other,

121  l'un si levò e l'altro cadde giuso,
122  non torcendo però le lucerne empie,
123  sotto le quai ciascun cambiava muso.

121  The one uprose and down the other fell,
122  Though turning not away their impious lamps,
123  Underneath which each one his muzzle changed.

124  Quel ch'era dritto, il trasse ver' le tempie,
125  e di troppa matera ch'in là venne
126  uscir li orecchi de le gote scempie;

124  He who was standing drew it tow'rds the temples,
125  And from excess of matter, which came thither,
126  Issued the ears from out the hollow cheeks;

127  ciò che non corse in dietro e si ritenne
128  di quel soverchio, fé naso a la faccia
129  e le labbra ingrossò quanto convenne.

127  What did not backward run and was retained
128  Of that excess made to the face a nose,
128  And the lips thickened far as was befitting.

130  Quel che giacëa, il muso innanzi caccia,
131  e li orecchi ritira per la testa
132  come face le corna la lumaccia;

130  He who lay prostrate thrusts his muzzle forward,
131  And backward draws the ears into his head,
132  In the same manner as the snail its horns;

133  e la lingua, ch'avèa unita e presta
134  prima a parlar, si fende, e la forcuta
135  ne l'altro si richiude; e 'l fummo resta.

133  And so the tongue, which was entire and apt
134  For speech before, is cleft, and the bi-forked
135  In the other closes up, and the smoke ceases.

136  L'anima ch'era fiera divenuta,
137  suffolando si fugge per la valle,
138  e l'altro dietro a lui parlando sputa.

136  The soul, which to a reptile had been changed,
137  Along the valley hissing takes to flight,
138  And after him the other speaking sputters.

139  Poscia li volse le novelle spalle,
140  e disse a l'altro: “I' vo' che Buoso corra,
141  com' ho fatt' io, carpon per questo calle.”

139  Then did he turn upon him his new shoulders,
140  And said to the other: "I'll have Buoso run,
141  Crawling as I have done, along this road."

142  Così vid' io la settima zavorra
143  mutare e trasmutare; e qui mi scusi
144  la novità se fior la penna abborra.

142  In this way I beheld the seventh ballast
143  Shift and reshift, and here be my excuse
144  The novelty, if aught my pen transgress.

145  E avvegna che li occhi miei confusi
146  fossero alquanto e l'animo smagato,
147  non poter quei fuggirsi tanto chiusi,

145  And notwithstanding that mine eyes might be
146  Somewhat bewildered, and my mind dismayed,
147  They could not flee away so secretly

148  ch'i' non scorgessi ben Puccio Sciancato;
149  ed era quel che sol, di tre compagni
150  che venner prima, non era mutato;

148  But that I plainly saw Puccio Sciancato;
149  And he it was who sole of three companions,
150  Which came in the beginning, was not changed;

151  l'altr' era quel che tu, Gaville, piagni.

151  The other was he whom thou, Gaville, weepest.

Canto XXVI
Ulysses would discover the highest (the vision of Mount Purgatory), and the lowest (the whirlpool that sucks him down to death and Hell) by means of physical, sensory experience.  His spirit of aspiration continuing to burn, even after has physical form has become, in a sense, fossilized by the ephemera of flame, just as a bone might be, cell by cell, fossilized to stone.  And yet ephemeral as he, Ulysses, is, he still is fixed by an idee fixe to know and experience more.  This is his way, which also includes deceit — the Trojan Horse, escape from lassitude — Circe, and absconding from familial responsibilities — leaving Penelope, Telemachus, and his aging father, and defying his own physical aging.  Virgil too would discover the highest and lowest, through reason and what he regards as truth.  And note how Virgil's vision of making the highest and the lowest discoverable through reason and through the aesthetics of poetry is the translator or intermediary between Ulysses' life of adventurure, and Dante's life as a mystic/poet.  Note too how both the adventurer's and the pagan reasoner's methods of exploration are anathema to Dante, the poet, and yet remain huge snares to Dante, the aspirant.  Dante, the aspirant, left wife, children and home too.  Dante the aspirant also burned to know the highest and the lowest.  Dante the aspirant too sought solace in reason and in learning.  But Dante the poet has discovered, or is discovering, that the path of Ulysses and the path of Virgil, are paths that lead only to Hell, pagan paths that are centered on what the individual, in his arrogance can will himself to do to satisfy his own curiosity, his own urge to be all that he can be.  What is left out of Virgil's and Ulysses' equations is faith, is the other, in Dante's case Beatrice, not his Penelope, which would have been Gemma, the wife he too abandoned, but the beloved spirit beyond any possibility of physical grasp and get.  Dante's ardor has moved from flesh to flame, and transfigured itself, through God's grace, from mortality to immortality.  Dante, the poet, is literally being turned on, and he flames on the fuel of Dante, the aspirant and exile, the man who is part of a history, which in the end would be nothing but ashes, were it not for the living word that the poet embodies.  Like Ulysses, Dante, the poet, is a speaking flame.

Dante, the aspirent's healing begins, as this canto begins, with shame.  The things that a man should be proud of — his place of birth, his earthly position and accomplishments, his wife and children have brought him shame.  He is beginning to feel and see, that mortality, without the promise of immortality, is a sty of shame.  This shame, as we saw Vanne Fucci discover, even survives death.  We could call shame the original sin, that is to say, shame in one's own birth on the physical plane, a shame that can pinch the spirit right out of the body, a shame in the unknown origins of conception and the unknown destiny which lies beyond life.

One thing that glaringly stands out in this canto, is the courtesy with which Ulysses is treated by the two protagonists, plus the straightforwardness with which Ulysses recounts his sin.  His explanation is certainly unrepentant, but I don't see where he attempts to shift the blame to others.  If the sin is giving fraudulent advice, then the vice of leaving his family, and the arrogance of having experience that no human has had before, are not what has damned him.  What damns him is his eloquence in persuading others to join him, and causing their deaths as well as his own.  Dante could not have written this without being aware that both he and Virgil were like Ulysses in the sense that it is a poet's job to sway, even if that persuasion is an aesthetic one only — i.e. to spend one's time on Earth with art, not politics, spiritual service, or charity.  And it is clearly a concern of Dante, the poet, that he must find some way to differentiate his "Christian" persuasions from Ulysses' exhortations to explore new realms and Virgil’s tales emphasizing his hero's piety and attention to his filial duties.  In the next canto, with Guido da Montefeltro, Dante, the poet tries to clarify what is ambiguous about his condemnation of Ulysses.  The juxtaposition of the two sinners in the same region of Hell for the same crime is vivid.  Guido's story in his own words, as is Ulysses', but Guido returns to the pattern which we have seen throughout Hell of blaming and self-pity.  We come away from this canto with an admiration for the sinner Ulysses, and a sense that we are dealing with a person with an heroic nature, who in classic tragic manner, falls because of that heroic nature.  As such, he is the only sinner in Hell, whose fate could be said to be tragic, i.e., not satisfactorily explained by the term Justice.  Ulysses fate seems not to be one of choice or will, but of nature.  We see him as someone to the manor born, as one would have a certain color of eyes or hair, he has it him to explore.  For that he is damned, but his damnation seems to have been a foregone conclusion.  He could not be the Ulysses the sinner, had he not been Ulysses the explorer, lover, husband, father, soldier.  His fame, his very identity rests upon his virtues in these roles, and it is these virtues that made his damnation inevitable.

No matter what you say or what you think your understand in Dante, there is always more.  That trick of poetic composition of developing a single metaphor, as we saw in Canto IV with the bird metaphor, is also employed here, as the metaphor of the flame evolves from that of fireflies in a field to the ascent of Elijah on his chariot of fire, and this leads us to  the question: Has Ulysses confused Natural splendor, with Divine splendor? — and are these two things, like the two Natures of Christ, connected by the Divine infusing Nature, or as in the Manichean heresies, does this world represent a dual aspect of the cosmos?, one Divine, the other merely accidental or even overtly evil.  One difference between Ulysses and Virgil's rhetoric and poetry respectively, is that their language is merely heroic, and will lead at best no further than a continuation of the heroic, or at worst, as is the case with both Ulysses and Virgil, since they have both ended their careers in Hell, to a circular repetition of that which leads from bland domesticity to destruction in a whirlwind.  But Dante's poetics cannot remain in this tradition.  And here we turn to Saint Augustine, as I feel certain Dante did, i.e. "the purpose of poetry is the promotion of charity to the end that God may be enjoyed.  His dictum on the true nature of eloquence: in words to love truth, not words.  Another way to put this, is that figures of poetry do not exist for their own sake, but for the sake of the reader's effort and sincerity of giving them meaning for the soul.  If in the beginning was the word, in the end, the word must be made flesh, and not just a description of flesh.  I think that Dante might have said that when we embody words, not just speak, write, or read them, we become what they are: A Creative Power.  For Dante, and Augustine, words must embody the Divine, or they are by definition false descriptions of illusory things.  

1  Godi, Fiorenza, poi che se' sì grande
2  che per mare e per terra batti l'ali,
3  e per lo 'nferno tuo nome si spande!
1  Rejoice, O Florence, since thou art so great,
2  That over sea and land thou beatest thy wings,
3  And throughout Hell thy name is spread abroad!
4  Tra li ladron trovai cinque cotali
5  tuoi cittadini onde mi ven vergogna,
6  e tu in grande orranza non ne sali.
4  Among the thieves five citizens of thine
5  Like these I found, whence shame comes unto me,
6  And thou thereby to no great honour risest.
7  Ma se presso al mattin del ver si sogna,
8  tu sentirai, di qua da picciol tempo,
9  di quel che Prato, non ch'altri, t'agogna.
7  But if when morn is near our dreams are true,
8  Feel shalt thou in a little time from now
9  What Prato, if none other, craves for thee.
10  E se già fosse, non saria per tempo.
11  Così foss' ei, da che pur esser dee!
12  ché più mi graverà, com' più m'attempo.
10  And if it now were, it were not too soon;
11  Would that it were, seeing it needs must be,
12  For 'twill aggrieve me more the more I age.
13  Noi ci partimmo, e su per le scalee
14  che n'avea fatto i borni a scender pria,
15  rimontò 'l duca mio e trasse mee;
13  We went our way, and up along the stairs
14  The bourns had made us to descend before,
15  Remounted my Conductor and drew me.
16  e proseguendo la solinga via,
17  tra le schegge e tra ' rocchi de lo scoglio
18  lo piè sanza la man non si spedia.
16  And following the solitary path
17  Among the rocks and ridges of the crag,
18  The foot without the hand sped not at all.
19  Allor mi dolsi, e ora mi ridoglio
20  quando drizzo la mente a ciò ch'io vidi,
21  e più lo 'ngegno affreno ch'i' non soglio,
19  Then sorrowed I, and sorrow now again,
20  When I direct my mind to what I saw,
21  And more my genius curb than I am wont,
22  perché non corra che virtù nol guidi;
23  sì che, se stella bona o miglior cosa
24  m'ha dato 'l ben, ch'io stessi nol m'invidi.

22  That it may run not unless virtue guide it;
23  So that if some good star, or better thing,
24  Have given me good, I may myself not grudge it.

25  Quante 'l villan ch'al poggio si riposa,
26  nel tempo che colui che 'l mondo schiara
27  la faccia sua a noi tien meno ascosa,
25  As many as the hind (who on the hill
26  Rests at the time when he who lights the world
27   His countenance keeps least concealed from us,
28  come la mosca cede a la zanzara,
29  vede lucciole giù per la vallea,
30  forse colà dov' e' vendemmia e ara:
28  While as the fly gives place unto the gnat)
29  Seeth the glow-worms down along the valley,
30  Perchance there where he ploughs and makes his vintage;
31  di tante fiamme tutta risplendea
32  l'ottava bolgia, sì com' io m'accorsi
33  tosto che fui là 've 'l fondo parea.
31  With flames as manifold resplendent all
32  Was the eighth Bolgia, as I grew aware
33  As soon as I was where the depth appeared.
34  E qual colui che si vengiò con li orsi
35  vide 'l carro d'Elia al dipartire,
36  quando i cavalli al cielo erti levorsi,
34  And such as he who with the bears avenged him
35  Beheld Elijah's chariot at departing,
36  What time the steeds to heaven erect uprose,
37  che nol potea sì con li occhi seguire,
38  ch'el vedesse altro che la fiamma sola,
39  sì come nuvoletta, in sù salire:
37  For with his eye he could not follow it
38  So as to see aught else than flame alone,
39  Even as a little cloud ascending upward,
40  tal si move ciascuna per la gola
41  del fosso, ch nessuna mostra 'l furto,
42  e ogne fiamma un peccatore invola.
40  Thus each along the gorge of the intrenchment
41  Was moving; for not one reveals the theft,
42  And every flame a sinner steals away.
43  Io stava sovra 'l ponte a veder surto,
44  sì che s'io non avessi un ronchion preso,
45  caduto sarei giù sanz' esser urto.
43  I stood upon the bridge uprisen to see,
44  So that, if I had seized not on a rock,
45  Down had I fallen without being pushed.
46  E 'l duca, che mi vide tanto atteso,
47  disse: “Dentro dai fuochi son li spirti;
48  catun si fascia di quel ch'elli è inceso.”
46  And the Leader, who beheld me so attent,
47  Exclaimed: "Within the fires the spirits are;
48  Each swathes himself with that wherewith he burns."

49  “Maestro mio,” rispuos' io, “per udirti
50  son io più certo; ma già m'era avviso
51  che così fosse, e già voleva dirti:
49  "My Master," I replied, "by hearing thee
50  I am more sure; but I surmised already
51  It might be so, and already wished to ask thee
52  chi è 'n quel foco che vien sì diviso
53  di sopra, che par surger de la pira
54  dov' Eteòcle col fratel fu miso?”
52  Who is within that fire, which comes so cleft
53  At top, it seems uprising from the pyre
54  Where was Eteocles with his brother placed."
55  Rispuose a me: “Là dentro si martira
56  Ulisse e Dïomede, e così insieme
57  a la vendetta vanno come a l'ira;
55  He answered me: "Within there are tormented
56  Ulysses and Diomed, and thus together
57  They unto vengeance run as unto wrath.
58  e dentro da la lor fiamma si geme
59  l'agguato del caval che fé la porta
60  onde uscì de' Romani il gentil seme.
58  And there within their flame do they lament
59  The ambush of the horse, which made the door
60  Whence issued forth the Romans' gentle seed;
61  Piangevisi entro l'arte per che, morta,
62  Deïdamìa ancor si duol d'Achille,
63  e del Palladio pena vi si porta.”
61  Therein is wept the craft, for which being dead
62  Deidamia still deplores Achilles,
63  And pain for the Palladium there is borne."
64  “S'ei posson dentro da quelle faville
65  parlar,” diss' io, “maestro, assai ten priego
66  e ripriego, che 'l priego vaglia mille,
64  "If they within those sparks possess the power
65  To speak," I said, "thee, Master, much I pray,
66  And re-pray, that the prayer be worth a thousand,
67  che non mi facci de l'attender niego
68  fin che la fiamma cornuta qua vegna;
69  vedi che del disio ver' lei mi piego!”
67  That thou make no denial of awaiting
68  Until the horned flame shall hither come;
69  Thou seest that with desire I lean towards it."
70  Ed elli a me: “La tua preghiera è degna
71  di molta loda, e io però l'accetto;
72  ma fa che la tua lingua si sostegna.
70  And he to me: "Worthy is thy entreaty
71  Of much applause, and therefore I accept it;
72  But take heed that thy tongue restrain itself.
73  Lascia parlare a me, ch'i' ho concetto
74  ciò che tu vuoi; ch'ei sarebbero schivi,
75  perch' e' fuor greci, forse del tuo detto.”
73  Leave me to speak, because I have conceived
74  That which thou wishest; for they might disdain
75  Perchance, since they were Greeks, discourse of thine."
76  Poi che la fiamma fu venuta quivi
77  dove parve al mio duca tempo e loco,
78  in questa forma lui parlare audivi:
76  When now the flame had come unto that point,
77  Where to my Leader it seemed time and place,
78  After this fashion did I hear him speak:
79  “O voi che siete due dentro ad un foco,
80  s'io meritai di voi mentre ch'io vissi,
81  s'io meritai di voi assai o poco
79  "O ye, who are twofold within one fire,
80  If I deserved of you, while I was living,
81  If I deserved of you or much or little
82  quando nel mondo li alti versi scrissi,
83  non vi movete; ma l'un di voi dica
84  dove, per lui, perduto a morir gissi.”
82  When in the world I wrote the lofty verses,
83  Do not move on, but one of you declare
84  Whither, being lost, he went away to die."
85  Lo maggior corno de la fiamma antica
86  cominciò a crollarsi mormorando,
87  pur come quella cui vento affatica;
85  Then of the antique flame the greater horn,
86  Murmuring, began to wave itself about
87  Even as a flame doth which the wind fatigues.
88  indi la cima qua e là menando,
89  come fosse la lingua che parlasse,
90  gittò voce di fuori e disse: “Quando
88  Thereafterward, the summit to and fro
89  Moving as if it were the tongue that spake,
90  It uttered forth a voice, and said: "When I
91  mi diparti' da Circe, che sottrasse
92  me più d'un anno là presso a Gaeta,
93  prima che sì Enëa la nomasse,
91  From Circe had departed, who concealed me
92  More than a year there near unto Gaeta,
93  Or ever yet Aeneas named it so,
94  né dolcezza di figlio, né la pieta
95  del vecchio padre, né 'l debito amore
96  lo qual dovea Penelopè far lieta,
94  Nor fondness for my son, nor reverence
95  For my old father, nor the due affection
96  Which joyous should have made Penelope,
97  vincer potero dentro a me l'ardore
98  ch'i' ebbi a divenir del mondo esperto
99  e de li vizi umani e del valore;
97  Could overcome within me the desire
98  I had to be experienced of the world,
99  And of the vice and virtue of mankind;
100  ma misi me per l'alto mare aperto
101  sol con un legno e con quella compagna
102  picciola da la qual non fui diserto.
100  But I put forth on the high open sea
101  With one sole ship, and that small company
102  By which I never had deserted been.
103  L'un lito e l'altro vidi infin la Spagna,
104  fin nel Morrocco, e l'isola d'i Sardi,
105  e l'altre che quel mare intorno bagna.
103  Both of the shores I saw as far as Spain,
104  Far as Morocco, and the isle of Sardes,
105  And the others which that sea bathes round about.
106  Io e' compagni eravam vecchi e tardi
107  quando venimmo a quella foce stretta
108  dov' Ercule segnò li suoi riguardi
106  I and my company were old and slow
107  When at that narrow passage we arrived
108  Where Hercules his landmarks set as signals,
109  acció che l'uom più oltre non si metta;
110  da la man destra mi lasciai Sibilia,
111  da l'altra già m'avea lasciata Setta.
109  That man no farther onward should adventure.
111  On the right hand behind me left I Seville,
111  And on the other already had left Ceuta.
112 'O frati,' dissi, 'che per cento milia
113  perigli siete giunti a l'occidente,
114  a questa tanto picciola vigilia
112  'O brothers, who amid a hundred thousand
113  Perils,' I said, 'have come unto the West,
114  To this so inconsiderable vigil
115  d'i nostri sensi ch'è del rimanente
116  non vogliate negar l'esperïenza,
117  di retro al sol, del mondo sanza gente.
115  Which is remaining of your senses still
116  Be ye unwilling to deny the knowledge,
117  Following the sun, of the unpeopled world.
118  Considerate la vostra semenza:
119  fatti non foste a viver come bruti,
120  ma per seguir virtute e canoscenza.'
118  Consider ye the seed from which ye sprang;
119  Ye were not made to live like unto brutes,
120  But for pursuit of virtue and of knowledge.'
121  Li miei compagni fec' io sì aguti,
122  con questa orazion picciola, al cammino,
123  che a pena poscia li avrei ritenuti;
121  So eager did I render my companions,
122  With this brief exhortation, for the voyage,
123  That then I hardly could have held them back.
124  e volta nostra poppa nel mattino,
125  de' remi facemmo ali al folle volo,
126  sempre acquistando dal lato mancino.
124  And having turned our stern unto the morning,
125  We of the oars made wings for our mad flight,
126  Evermore gaining on the larboard side.
127  Tutte le stelle già de l'altro polo
128  vedea la notte, e 'l nostro tanto basso,
129  che non surgëa fuor del marin suolo.
127  Already all the stars of the other pole
128  The night beheld, and ours so very low
129  It did not rise above the ocean floor.
130  Cinque volte racceso e tante casso
131  lo lume era di sotto da la luna,
132  poi che 'ntrati eravam ne l'alto passo,
130  Five times rekindled and as many quenched
131  Had been the splendour underneath the moon,
132  Since we had entered into the deep pass,
133  quando n'apparve una montagna, bruna
134  per la distanza, e parvemi alta tanto
135  quanto veduta non avëa alcuna.
133  When there appeared to us a mountain, dim
134  From distance, and it seemed to me so high
135  As I had never any one beheld.
136  Noi ci allegrammo, e tosto tornò in pianto;
137  ché de la nova terra un turbo nacque
138  e percosse del legno il primo canto.
136  Joyful were we, and soon it turned to weeping;
137  For out of the new land a whirlwind rose,
138  And smote upon the fore part of the ship.
139  Tre volte il fé girar con tutte l'acque;
140  a la quarta levar la poppa in suso
141  e la prora ire in giù, com' altrui piacque,
139  Three times it made her whirl with all the waters,
140  At the fourth time it made the stern uplift,
141  And the prow downward go, as pleased Another,
142  infin che 'l mar fu sovra noi richiuso.”
142  Until the sea above us closed again."
Canto XXVII
Both Cantos XXVI and XXVII are engrossed with the issue of  "fraudulent councilor’s", who speaks to whom and in what "accent" seems to be almost for the purpose of discovering the speakers' places of origin.  What language one speaks or how and to whom one speaks seems to rely on a territorial sense of identity.  As sometimes, even now, Nationalists will become enraged when hearing a citizen or a foreigner in "their" land speaking in another language, thus us and them, friend or enemy, are derived from how one speaks.  That is to say: does your speech identify the place your coming from: Hell, Purgatory, or Heaven.  It is as if the word 'accent" is like an animal's marking of its territory by urinating and leaving a warning scent-sign to ward off rivals.  Who I am, where I first learned my name, where I learned the art — like Adam — of naming, gives me my sense of self, which is why exile is so damning.  (You see this in Proust too who devotes a great deal of thought to establishing the etymologies of words through place names, and in Vico, the very origins of mankind can be determined by recourse to etymologies).  The sinner spoken to in Canto XXVII is Guido da (from) Montefeltro, and the speaker, as have many speakers throughout the poem, identifies himself by conflating speech acts, identity, and place of origin.  An enemy Other betrays himself by an act of speech.  This I believe is why Ulysses and Guido are placed so deeply in Hell, because they not only have betrayed their fellows by corrupting the speech act, and using speech itself as a weapon, they have betrayed the very principle of what it means to be human, and to have a soul that may perpetuate itself, even in the afterlife, through the endurance of words and their imperishable fame.  Perhaps this also explains why the protagonists, both poets, are not enraged at these sinners, because in a strange way, a liar, a false councilor, honors language by realizing, just as poets do, its awesome power.  It's very telling, I believe, that this Canto opens with the image of the Sicilian Bull, a torture device, in which a hollow brass bull coffins its victim, and when heated, emits the victim's inarticulate cries.  Telling too, that this clever device's first victim is its creator.  It's fitting too, that the victim, as in this case Guido, speaks from torturing flames, his voice given over to a kind of mechanical animal, whose purpose is to torture and deceive.  Hell, Purgatory, and Heaven, as poetically conceived by Dante, are places created by speech acts (Just as Saint John says when he writes "In the beginning was the Word."), and the test of those speech acts, their ultimate truth or falseness, seems not to lie in whether or not their signs are an accurate representation of something that exists or that happens in the world, but rather the effects they affect in the world.  Do they cause pain?  Do they unify?  Do they bring peace or bloodshed?  In brief, do they bless or damn, the very two keys that Pope Boniface VIII used to compel even his enemies to serve him.  These "cloven fictions", as Blake would call them, are what make and balance or unbalance the scales of justice.  We know, that in Hell, the speakers continue to deceive, first themselves, then others, and so their damnation continues.  They have spoken words that condemn and they are condemned, exiled from themselves and from heaven, their tongues, in a parody of the Pentecostal tongues of flame, become only the purveyors of theirs and other's torture.  The question for Dante, the poet, and why he so often insists that everything he writes or speaks about this fantastic journey is the truth, is how can he make the speech act, not only an instrument of justice, but a vehicle, like Elijah's, in which the speaker and his listeners can ascend to bliss?

I have this question: Is a secret, that is, a truth unspoken, the same as a lie?  Guido says "no."  Silence, he decides, is worse than a lie.  But Guido is in Hell, and his blaming self-serving speech, is what damns him.  Are we to assume that his words are Bull ‚ Sicilian Bull that is, which would be better left unspoken, or in this case, spoken only under the false assumption that his listener will never be able to repeat them to anyone still living.  We all have secrets, those things we keep from others about them or ourselves, and if my reasoning is just here, are we not better off tactfully observing silence, no matter what the consequences, if our speech would do harm?  This question must remain an open one, determined, not as some absolute, but as a constant struggle to ascertain the difference between serving one's self and serving others — or even coming to the realization that Self and Other are unified in the same enigma.  Speech is born from silence and returns there, but it's journey seems always to be traversing a landscape fraught with the questons of: Who is it that is harmed are helped? what is their accent? where are they coming from, and where are they going?
           
1  Già era dritta in sù la fiamma e queta
2  per non dir più, e già da noi sen gia
3  con la licenza del dolce poeta,

1  Already was the flame erect and quiet,
2  To speak no more, and now departed from us
3  With the permission of the gentle Poet;

4  quand' un'altra, che dietro a lei venìa,
5  ne fece volger li occhi a la sua cima
6  per un confuso suon che fuor n'uscia.

4  When yet another, which behind it came,
5  Caused us to turn our eyes upon its top
6  By a confused sound that issued from it.

7  Come 'l bue cicilian che mugghiò prima
8  col pianto di colui, e ciò fu dritto,
9  che l'avea temperato con sua lima,

7  As the Sicilian bull (that bellowed first
8  With the lament of him, and that was right,
9  Who with his file had modulated it)

10  mugghiava con la voce de l'afflitto,
11  sì che, con tutto che fosse di rame,
12  pur el pareva dal dolor trafitto;

10  Bellowed so with the voice of the afflicted,
11  That, notwithstanding it was made of brass,
12  Still it appeared with agony transfixed; 

13  così, per non aver via né forame
14  dal principio nel foco, in suo linguaggio
15  si convertïan le parole grame.

13  Thus, by not having any way or issue
14  At first from out the fire, to its own language
15  Converted were the melancholy words.

16  Ma poscia ch'ebber colto lor vïaggio
17  su per la punta, dandole quel guizzo
18  che dato avea la lingua in lor passaggio,

16  But afterwards, when they had gathered way
17  Up through the point, giving it that vibration
18  The tongue had given them in their passage out,

19  udimmo dire: “O tu a cu' io drizzo
20  la voce e che parlavi mo lombardo,
21  dicendo 'Istra ten va, più non t'adizzo'

19  We heard it said: "O thou, at whom I aim
20  My voice, and who but now wast speaking Lombard,
21  Saying, 'Now go thy way, no more I urge thee,'

22  perch' io sia giunto forse alquanto tardo,
23  non t'incresca restare a parlar meco;
24  vedi che non incresce a me, e ardo!

22  Because I come perchance a little late,
23  To stay and speak with me let it not irk thee;
24  Thou seest it irks not me, and I am burning.

25  Se tu pur mo in questo mondo cieco
26  caduto se' di quella dolce terra
27  latina ond' io mia colpa tutta reco,

25  If thou but lately into this blind world
26  Hast fallen down from that sweet Latian land,
27  Wherefrom I bring the whole of my transgression,

28  dimmi se Romagnuoli han pace o guerra;
29  ch'io fui d'i monti là intra Orbino
30  e 'l giogo di che Tever si diserra.”

28  Say, if the Romagnuols have peace or war,
29  For I was from the mountains there between
30  Urbino and the yoke whence Tiber bursts."

31  Io era in giuso ancora attento e chino,
32  quando il mio duca mi tentò di costa,
33  dicendo: “Parla tu; questi è latino.”

31  I still was downward bent and listening,
32  When my Conductor touched me on the side,
33  Saying: "Speak thou: this one a Latian is."

34  E io, ch'avea già pronta la risposta,
35  sanza indugio a parlare incominciai:
36  “O anima che se' là giù nascosta,

34  And I, who had beforehand my reply
35  In readiness, forthwith began to speak:
36  "O soul, that down below there art concealed,

37  Romagna tua non è, e non fu mai,
38  sanza guerra ne' cuor de' suoi tiranni;
39  ma 'n palese nessuna or vi lasciai.

37  Romagna thine is not and never has been
38  Without war in the bosom of its tyrants;
39  But open war I none have left there now.

40  Ravenna sta come stata è molt' anni:
41  l'aguglia da Polenta la si cova,
42  sì che Cervia ricuopre co' suoi vanni.

40  Ravenna stands as it long years has stood;
41  The Eagle of Polenta there is brooding,
42  So that she covers Cervia with her vans.

43  La terra che fé già la lunga prova
44  e di Franceschi sanguinoso mucchio,
45  sotto le branche verdi si ritrova.

43  The city which once made the long resistance,
44  And of the French a sanguinary heap,
45  Beneath the Green Paws finds itself again;

46  E 'l mastin vecchio e 'l nuovo da Verrucchio,
47  che fecer di Montagna il mal governo,
48  là dove soglion fan d'i denti succhio.

46  Verrucchio's ancient Mastiff and the new,
47  Who made such bad disposal of Montagna,
48  Where they are wont make wimbles of their teeth.

49  Le città di Lamone e di Santerno
50  conduce il lïoncel dal nido bianco,
51  che muta parte da la state al verno.

49  The cities of Lamone and Santerno
50  Governs the Lioncel of the white lair,
51  Who changes sides 'twixt summer-time and winter;

52  E quella cu' il Savio bagna il fianco,
53  così com' ella sie' tra 'l piano e 'l monte,
54  tra tirannia si vive e stato franco.

52  And that of which the Savio bathes the flank,
53  Even as it lies between the plain and mountain,
54  Lives between tyranny and a free state.

55  Ora chi se', ti priego che ne conte;
56  non esser duro più ch'altri sia stato,
57  se 'l nome tuo nel mondo tegna fronte.”

55  Now I entreat thee tell us who thou art;
56  Be not more stubborn than the rest have been,
57  So may thy name hold front there in the world."

58  Poscia che 'l foco alquanto ebbe rugghiato
59  al modo suo, l'aguta punta mosse
60  di qua, di là, e poi diè cotal fiato:

58  After the fire a little more had roared
59  In its own fashion, the sharp point it moved
60  This way and that, and then gave forth such breath:

61  “S'i' credesse che mia risposta fosse
62  a persona che mai tornasse al mondo,
63  questa fiamma staria sanza più scosse;

61  "If I believed that my reply were made
62  To one who to the world would e'er return,
63  This flame without more flickering would stand still;

64  ma però che già mai di questo fondo
65  non tornò vivo alcun, s'i' odo il vero,
66  sanza tema d'infamia ti rispondo.

64  But inasmuch as never from this depth
65  Did any one return, if I hear true,
66  Without the fear of infamy I answer,

67  Io fui uom d'arme, e poi fui cordigliero,
68  credendomi, sì cinto, fare ammenda;
69  e certo il creder mio venìa intero,

67  I was a man of arms, then Cordelier,
68  Believing thus begirt to make amends;
69  And truly my belief had been fulfilled

70  se non fosse il gran prete, a cui mal prenda!,
71  che mi rimise ne le prime colpe;
72  e come e quare, voglio che m'intenda.

70  But for the High Priest, whom may ill betide,
71  Who put me back into my former sins;
72  And how and wherefore I will have thee hear.

73  Mentre ch'io forma fui d'ossa e di polpe
74  che la madre mi diè, l'opere mie
75  non furon leonine, ma di volpe.

73  While I was still the form of bone and pulp
74  My mother gave to me, the deeds I did
75  Were not those of a lion, but a fox.

76  Li accorgimenti e le coperte vie
77  io seppi tutte, e sì menai lor arte,
78  ch'al fine de la terra il suono uscie.

76  The machinations and the covert ways
77  I knew them all, and practised so their craft,
78  That to the ends of earth the sound went forth.

79  Quando mi vidi giunto in quella parte
80  di mia etade ove ciascun dovrebbe
81  calar le vele e raccoglier le sarte,

79  When now unto that portion of mine age
80  I saw myself arrived, when each one ought
81  To lower the sails, and coil away the ropes,

82  ciò che pria mi piacëa, allor m'increbbe,
83  e pentuto e confesso mi rendei;
84  ahi miser lasso! e giovato sarebbe.

82  That which before had pleased me then displeased me;
83  And penitent and confessing I surrendered,
84  Ah woe is me! and it would have bestead me;

85  Lo principe d'i novi Farisei,
86  avendo guerra presso a Laterano,
87  e non con Saracin né con Giudei,

85  The Leader of the modern Pharisees
86  Having a war near unto Lateran,
87  And not with Saracens nor with the Jews,

88  ché ciascun suo nimico era cristiano,
89  e nessun era stato a vincer Acri
90  né mercatante in terra di Soldano,

88  For each one of his enemies was Christian,
89  And none of them had been to conquer Acre,
90  Nor merchandising in the Sultan's land,

91  né sommo officio né ordini sacri
92  guardò in sé, né in me quel capestro
93  che solea fare i suoi cinti più macri.
91  Nor the high office, nor the sacred orders,
92  In him regarded, nor in me that cord
93  Which used to make those girt with it more meagre;

94  Ma come Costantin chiese Silvestro
95  d'entro Siratti a guerir de la lebbre,
96  così mi chiese questi per maestro

94  But even as Constantine sought out Sylvester
95  To cure his leprosy, within Soracte,
96  So this one sought me out as an adept

97  a guerir de la sua superba febbre;
98  domandommi consiglio, e io tacetti
99  perché le sue parole parver ebbre.

97  To cure him of the fever of his pride.
98  Counsel he asked of me, and I was silent,
99  Because his words appeared inebriate.

100  E' poi ridisse: 'Tuo cuor non sospetti;
101  finor t'assolvo, e tu m'insegna fare
102  sì come Penestrino in terra getti.

100  And then he said: 'Be not thy heart afraid;
101  Henceforth I thee absolve; and thou instruct me
102  How to raze Palestrina to the ground.

103  Lo ciel poss' io serrare e diserrare,
104  come tu sai; però son due le chiavi
105  che 'l mio antecessor non ebbe care.'

103  Heaven have I power to lock and to unlock,
104  As thou dost know; therefore the keys are two,
105  The which my predecessor held not dear.'

106  Allor mi pinser li argomenti gravi
107  là 've 'l tacer mi fu avviso 'l peggio,
108  e dissi: 'Padre, da che tu mi lavi

106  Then urged me on his weighty arguments
107  There, where my silence was the worst advice;
108  And said I: 'Father, since thou washest me

109  di quel peccato ov' io mo cader deggio,
110  lunga promessa con l'attender corto
111  ti farà trïunfar ne l'alto seggio.'

109  Of that sin into which I now must fall,
110  The promise long with the fulfilment short
111  Will make thee triumph in thy lofty seat.'

112  Francesco venne poi, com' io fu' morto,
113  per me; ma un d'i neri cherubini
114  li disse: 'Non portar; non mi far torto.

112  Francis came afterward, when I was dead,
113  For me; but one of the black Cherubim
114  Said to him: 'Take him not; do me no wrong;

115  Venir se ne dee giù tra ' miei meschini
116  perché diede 'l consiglio frodolente,
117  dal quale in qua stato li sono a' crini;

115  He must come down among my servitors,
116  Because he gave the fraudulent advice
117  From which time forth I have been at his hair;

118  ch'assolver non si può chi non si pente,
119  né pentere e volere insieme puossi
120  per la contradizion che nol consente.'

118  For who repents not cannot be absolved,
119  Nor can one both repent and will at once,
120  Because of the contradiction which consents not.'

121  Oh me dolente! come mi riscossi
122  quando mi prese dicendomi: 'Forse
123  tu non pensavi ch'io löico fossi!'

121  O miserable me! how I did shudder
122  When he seized on me, saying: 'Peradventure
123  Thou didst not think that I was a logician!'

124  A Minòs mi portò; e quelli attorse
125  otto volte la coda al dosso duro;
126  e poi che per gran rabbia la si morse,

124  He bore me unto Minos, who entwined
125  Eight times his tail about his stubborn back,
126  And after he had bitten it in great rage,

127  disse: 'Questi è d'i rei del foco furo';
128  per ch'io là dove vedi son perduto,
129  e sì vestito, andando, mi rancuro.”

127  Said: 'Of the thievish fire a culprit this;'
128  Wherefore, here where thou seest, am I lost,
129  And vested thus in going I bemoan me."

130  Quand' elli ebbe 'l suo dir così compiuto,
131  la fiamma dolorando si partio,
132  torcendo e dibattendo 'l corno aguto.

130  When it had thus completed its recital,
131  The flame departed uttering lamentations,
132  Writhing and flapping its sharp-pointed horn.

133  Noi passamm' oltre, e io e 'l duca mio,
134  su per lo scoglio infino in su l'altr' arco
135  che cuopre 'l fosso in che si paga il fio

133  Onward we passed, both I and my Conductor,
134  Up o'er the crag above another arch,
135  Which the moat covers, where is paid the fee

136  a quei che scommettendo acquistan carco.

136  By those who, sowing discord, win their burden.

Canto XXVII
The horror of viewing human bodies mutilated by stabbing, piercing, and slicing instruments, the horror of the innards suddenly exposed by violence, and the harmony of the human form converted into mucilage — something Dante would have known as a consequence of his military experience — that is how Canto XXVIII begins, and the first couple of stanzas show a revulsion that is literally, as Dante makes clear, unspeakable.  Like a heart surgeon, cutting into a chest, cracking the ribs apart, a sinner appears, sliced from chin to anus, entrails dangling between his legs, who, with his own cruel hands, rends his own chest, exposing his beating heart.  The simile here is that of a wine casque, losing its structural integrity, bursting, and spilling its liquid: a liquification, a complete dissolution of the human form into a kind of fluid and ubiquitous agony, no part free from the torment of perpetual rending.  This is the condition of one of the multitudes of sinners who first presents himself to Virgil and the aspirant.  He is Mohammed and it is Ali who stands near him.  Thus he reveals that he was a schismatic, a sower of discord, a man whose speech and actions led to a rending of the body-politic and to the anatomization of his human form.  

I think that it's clear from the opening lines of this canto that Dante is using the most vulgar language to illuminate the grotesque nature of violence, the grotesque nature of any language that incites discord and violence ... and yet, there is something else too, something subtler and weirder.  We see here the way that art can assume a kind of metaposition above this discord.  It can in fact use the language of discord to transcend discord.  It does not incite, it illuminates.  People kill each other from disputes in religious doctrine and political rhetoric, but art seems to be able to incite the passions without recourse to violence.  In brief, the extreme positions of art lead to ineffability, not to murder.  We also see here, as we have seen throughout the poem, this circular shape — the tormented trudging in an endless round of healing and rending, a geometric metaphor that illustrates the retributive nature of violence.  Violent speech acts begetting violent acts in an endless round of war, exhausted interregnums, and resumption of war.  That is the nature of the schismatic, he believes that he can heal the split in his own psyche by destroying one half of his own nature, by shattering his own integrity, and becoming the devil whom he believes his enemy to be.  His very healing is only the recovery of his own demonic self, rising again to revenge its injuries.  We learn all this before we come to line 43, wherein we must tackle once again the divisive nature of identity itself in the Hell of a conflicted psyche.  Dante is always taking us deeper and deeper into this question: Who am I?  And why are the many selves that constitute me, so often inimical to one another?

At this point in the canto, Virgil identifies himself as one of the dead, and as readers, we begin to glimpse a characteristic conservativism that infects all those fomenting internal and external hells — they are fixed in their own rounds of rigid beliefs, and this damnation has engulfed Virgil too, by the very nature of his paganism, his adherence to reason, which cannot possibly pacify his inner world of multiple conflicting gods, paganism being at bottom the deification of parts which prevent the pagan from ever glimpsing the marvelous harmony of the whole.  The sequence of cause and effect, premise and conclusion, will always be linear and circular, it can never be global.  But for the living body, the living psyche, life is never linear, circularly repetitive, or piecemeal.  It is always a whole participating in a greater wholeness, and at line 52, Dante has a marvelous image of the damned staring in wonder at a living being, as if they think it is impossible for such dynamic integrity to even exist.  The perpetual learner, the perpetual poet, the perpetual aspirant is the very antithesis of who they are, and yet he does not appear as another devil to rend them.  Dante, the aspirant, is a wonder to those who have decided their own fate by having falsely decided their own beliefs about fate.  Here, as elsewhere, the reader is confronted with a choice: To judge or to learn.  To say, "yes, I like this, or no, this is no good for me" — or to release that dichotomy and submerse oneself in the experience of art.  The poem can express pain, show the experience of pain, without being either pain's source or manifestation.   And there is a moment here, in which the sinners too forget their agony, as they are lost in wonder.  How marvelous!  How simply marvelous, how Dante, by this simple stroke, shows the healing and transforming power of the artist, the living person among armies of the dead.

Now comes the great moment of the suspended foot.  A moment in which Mohammed, having committed the beneficent act of asking Dante to warn Fra Dolcino against this fate, could choose to go another way.  Here is a hovering in uncertainty, in which Mohammed might choose to be someone other than the Mohammed of schismatics.  He might connect to a global field of compassion.  But that moment passes.  Why?  Because the delusion of a separate and separating identity is by its very nature an obsession.   Thus, obsessively, Mohammed continues being whom he believes himself to be.  With the certainty of gravitation, he moves on to continue his rounds of incessant torment.  This is grotesque, and immediately the poem returns us to the grotesque, as another horribly mutilated sinner presents himself.

Now we encounter Pier da Medicina, mutilated so that he may only speak through his windpipe, without a nose to sniff out falsehood, a man whose schismatic acts are political, it seems, rather than, religious — and an exemplar of what it means to be exposed.  For in Hell the mask of deceit is ripped or sliced off, and the ugly, red guts of disfigurement are revealed.  It seems the Dante is telling us that no matter how much we try to hide our splintered self, our speech and our acts will always expose us, and the placid exterior will always be hacked away to reveal the grotesque: chaotic, painful, repulsive to be or to see.  Pier's words are the words of an exile, an exile from life and also from his native land, and because he is linked to Dante by their language, language too is shown to be the ultimate homeland.  Ironically, as Dante, the poet, is discovering, the only homeland Dante, himself to be an exile from his native Florence, will ever know again.  In a parallel construction, Pier too implores Dante to warn those among the living, but his warning does not damn those of whom he speaks, but those who betrayed and drowned them — a crime which appalls nature itself, as the entire Mediterranean Sea (Neptune/Nattuno) has never witnessed so great a betrayal.  The fact that the sinner foresees that the victims will be drowned is telling, because evil, when it is pervasive in the culture, inundates the innocent too in an ocean of collateral damage.  The sea can be an emblem of dissolution and chaos, and it can have a roiling inner turbulence like that of the sinner.

The canto continues with parallel examples from both the ancient world and from Dante's contemporaries of false council, and the betrayal of speech itself (remember: the ultimate homeland), and its dismembering consequences.  The aspirant Dante's persistent questioning here and throughout the Commedia, until the very end, show him to be one who lives, because he continues to inquire, even into the conditions of Hell.  He does not repress his trauma, he examines it, and he even uses the damned as his teachers, just as he uses Virgil.  If Hell is a place of war, Purgatory a place of learning, and Paradise a place of transcendence, then Dante, even in Hell can never be truly among the company of the damned, because he is always, at the very least, in a learning mode, and to question, as every small child knows who asks why? why? why? is to engage, to enter the very mystery of the self, no matter how grotesquely the self is presenting in the moment.

The descriptions of the sinners which follows are particularly gruesome, and they reveal an even more fundamental language, the language of being — every act, every muscle, even our clothing exposes us to the penetrating gaze of an open and curious witness.  The true aspirant is like child in these matters, he sees through social conditioning and disguise to what truly is.  And as is the case here, he can read the difference between wholeness and mutilation, between beneficent truth and deceiving and self-deceiving rancor.  Line 111 puts it succinctly.  The essence of self-deception and self-aggrandizement at the expense of others is sadness and insanity.

The canto concludes with the most grotesque vision of all, that of Bertran de Born, who fomented the rebellion of Prince Harry against his father, King Henry II.  Bertran apparently loved the desolation of cities and towns by war, and he is condemned to carry, like a benighted lantern, his own head in his hands, and it is through his decapitated head that he speaks his self-pitying laments.  If we allow our thoughts and beliefs to betray the integrity of the body, the body of faith, or the body-politic, we are condemned perpetually to suffer the very schism of this grotesque perversion.  Apparently Bertran perceives in his condition, how his own monstrous misperceptions fractally repeated themselves in the culture at large.  He is both cause and effect, this and that, two in one, and one in two.  And Dante points out the mystery of this condition in a language that leaves it to the transcendent self to illuminate.             

1  Chi poria mai pur con parole sciolte
2  dicer del sangue e de le piaghe a pieno
3  ch'i' ora vidi, per narrar più volte?

1  Who ever could, e'en with untrammelled words,
2  Tell of the blood and of the wounds in full
3  Which now I saw, by many times narrating?

4  Ogne lingua per certo verria meno
5  per lo nostro sermone e per la mente
6  c'hanno a tanto comprender poco seno.

4  Each tongue would for a certainty fall short
5  By reason of our speech and memory,
6  That have small room to comprehend so much.

7  S'el s'aunasse ancor tutta la gente
8  che già, in su la fortunata terra
9  di Puglia, fu del suo sangue dolente

7  If were again assembled all the people
8  Which formerly upon the fateful land
9  Of Puglia were lamenting for their blood

10  per li Troiani e per la lunga guerra
11  che de l'anella fé sì alte spoglie,
12  come Livïo scrive, che non erra,

10  Shed by the Romans and the lingering war
11  That of the rings made such illustrious spoils,
12  As Livy has recorded, who errs not,

13  con quella che sentio di colpi doglie
14  per contastare a Ruberto Guiscardo;
15  e l'altra il cui ossame ancor s'accoglie

13  With those who felt the agony of blows
14  By making counterstand to Robert Guiscard,
15  And all the rest, whose bones are gathered still

16  a Ceperan, là dove fu bugiardo
17  ciascun Pugliese, e là da Tagliacozzo,
18  dove sanz' arme vinse il vecchio Alardo;

16  At Ceperano, where a renegade
17  Was each Apulian, and at Tagliacozzo,
18  Where without arms the old Alardo conquered,

19  e qual forato suo membro e qual mozzo
20  mostrasse, d'aequar sarebbe nulla
21  il modo de la nona bolgia sozzo.

19  And one his limb transpierced, and one lopped off,
20  Should show, it would be nothing to compare
21  With the disgusting mode of the ninth Bolgia.

22  Già veggia, per mezzul perdere o lulla,
23  com' io vidi un, così non si pertugia,
24  rotto dal mento infin dove si trulla.

22  A cask by losing centre-piece or cant
23  Was never shattered so, as I saw one
24  Rent from the chin to where one breaketh wind.

25  Tra le gambe pendevan le minugia;
26  la corata pareva e 'l tristo sacco
27  che merda fa di quel che si trangugia.

25  Between his legs were hanging down his entrails;
26  His heart was visible, and the dismal sack
27  That maketh excrement of what is eaten.

28  Mentre che tutto in lui veder m'attacco,
29  guardommi e con le man s'aperse il petto,
30  dicendo: “Or vedi com' io mi dilacco!

28  While I was all absorbed in seeing him,
29  He looked at me, and opened with his hands
30  His bosom, saying: "See now how I rend me;

31  vedi come storpiato è Mäometto!
32  Dinanzi a me sen va piangendo Alì,
33  fesso nel volto dal mento al ciuffetto.

31  How mutilated, see, is Mahomet;
32  In front of me doth Ali weeping go,
33  Cleft in the face from forelock unto chin;

34  E tutti li altri che tu vedi qui,
35  seminator di scandalo e di scisma
36  fuor vivi, e però son fessi così.

34  And all the others whom thou here beholdest,
35  Disseminators of scandal and of schism
36  While living were, and therefore are cleft thus.

37  Un diavolo è qua dietro che n'accisma
38  sì crudelmente, al taglio de la spada
39  rimettendo ciascun di questa risma,

37  A devil is behind here, who doth cleave us
38  Thus cruelly, unto the falchion's edge
39  Putting again each one of all this ream,

40  quand' avem volta la dolente strada;
41  però che le ferite son richiuse
42  prima ch'altri dinanzi li rivada.

40  When we have gone around the doleful road;
41  By reason that our wounds are closed again
42  Ere any one in front of him repass.

43  Ma tu chi se' che 'n su lo scoglio muse,
44  forse per indugiar d'ire a la pena
45  ch'è giudicata in su le tue accuse?”

43  But who art thou, that musest on the crag,
44  Perchance to postpone going to the pain
45  That is adjudged upon thine accusations?"

46  “Né morte 'l giunse ancor, né colpa 'l mena,”
47  rispuose 'l mio maestro, “a tormentarlo;
48  ma per dar lui esperïenza piena,

46  "Nor death hath reached him yet, nor guilt doth bring him,"
47  My Master made reply, "to be tormented;
48  But to procure him full experience,

49  a me, che morto son, convien menarlo
50  per lo 'nferno qua giù di giro in giro;
51  e quest' è ver così com' io ti parlo.”

49  Me, who am dead, behoves it to conduct him
50  Down here through Hell, from circle unto circle;
51  And this is true as that I speak to thee."

52  Più fuor di cento che, quando l'udiro,
53  s'arrestaron nel fosso a riguardarmi
54  per maraviglia, oblïando il martiro.

52  More than a hundred were there when they heard him,
53  Who in the moat stood still to look at me,
54  Through wonderment oblivious of their torture.

55  “Or dì a fra Dolcin dunque che s'armi,
56  tu che forse vedra' il sole in breve,
57  s'ello non vuol qui tosto seguitarmi,

55  "Now say to Fra Dolcino, then, to arm him,
56  Thou, who perhaps wilt shortly see the sun,
57  If soon he wish not here to follow me,

58  sì di vivanda, che stretta di neve
59  non rechi la vittoria al Noarese,
60  ch'altrimenti acquistar non saria leve.”

58  So with provisions, that no stress of snow
59  May give the victory to the Novarese,
60  Which otherwise to gain would not be easy."

61  Poi che l'un piè per girsene sospese,
62  Mäometto mi disse esta parola;
63  indi a partirsi in terra lo distese.

61  After one foot to go away he lifted,
62  This word did Mahomet say unto me,
63  Then to depart upon the ground he stretched it.

64  Un altro, che forata avea la gola
65  e tronco 'l naso infin sotto le ciglia,
66  e non avea mai ch'una orecchia sola,

64  Another one, who had his throat pierced through,
65  And nose cut off close underneath the brows,
66  And had no longer but a single ear,

67  ristato a riguardar per maraviglia
68  con li altri, innanzi a li altri aprì la canna,
69  ch'era di fuor d'ogne parte vermiglia,

67  Staying to look in wonder with the others,
68  Before the others did his gullet open,
69  Which outwardly was red in every part,

70  e disse: “O tu cui colpa non condanna
71  e cu' io vidi in su terra latina,
72  se troppa simiglianza non m'inganna,

70  And said: "O thou, whom guilt doth not condemn,
71  And whom I once saw up in Latian land,
72  Unless too great similitude deceive me,

73  rimembriti di Pier da Medicina,
74  se mai torni a veder lo dolce piano
75  che da Vercelli a Marcabò dichina.

73  Call to remembrance Pier da Medicina,
74  If e'er thou see again the lovely plain
75  That from Vercelli slopes to Marcabo,

76  E fa sapere a' due miglior da Fano,
77  a messer Guido e anco ad Angiolello,
78  che, se l'antiveder qui non è vano,

76  And make it known to the best two of Fano,
77  To Messer Guido and Angiolello likewise,
78  That if foreseeing here be not in vain,

79  gittati saran fuor di lor vasello
80  e mazzerati presso a la Cattolica
81  per tradimento d'un tiranno fello.

79  Cast over from their vessel shall they be,
80  And drowned near unto the Cattolica,
81  By the betrayal of a tyrant fell.

82  Tra l'isola di Cipri e di Maiolica
83  non vide mai sì gran fallo Nettuno,
84  non da pirate, non da gente argolica.

82  Between the isles of Cyprus and Majorca
83  Neptune ne'er yet beheld so great a crime,
84  Neither of pirates nor Argolic people.

85  Quel traditor che vede pur con l'uno,
86  e tien la terra che tale qui meco
87  vorrebbe di vedere esser digiuno,

85  That traitor, who sees only with one eye,
86  And holds the land, which some one here with me
87  Would fain be fasting from the vision of,

88  farà venirli a parlamento seco;
89  poi farà sì, ch'al vento di Focara
90  non sarà lor mestier voto né preco.”

88  Will make them come unto a parley with him;
89  Then will do so, that to Focara's wind
90  They will not stand in need of vow or prayer."

91  E io a lui: “Dimostrami e dichiara,
92  se vuo' ch'i' porti sù di te novella,
93  chi è colui da la veduta amara.”

91  And I to him: "Show to me and declare,
92  If thou wouldst have me bear up news of thee,
93  Who is this person of the bitter vision."

94  Allor puose la mano a la mascella
95  d'un suo compagno e la bocca li aperse,
96  gridando: “Questi è desso, e non favella.

94  Then did he lay his hand upon the jaw
95  Of one of his companions, and his mouth
96  Oped, crying: "This is he, and he speaks not.

97  Questi, scacciato, il dubitar sommerse
98  in Cesare, affermando che 'l fornito
99  sempre con danno l'attender sofferse.”

97  This one, being banished, every doubt submerged
98  In Caesar by affirming the forearmed
99  Always with detriment allowed delay."

100  Oh quanto mi pareva sbigottito
101  con la lingua tagliata ne la strozza
102  Curïo, ch'a dir fu così ardito!

100  O how bewildered unto me appeared,
101  With tongue asunder in his windpipe slit,
102  Curio, who in speaking was so bold!

103  E un ch'avea l'una e l'altra man mozza,
104  levando i moncherin per l'aura fosca,
105  sì che 'l sangue facea la faccia sozza,

103  And one, who both his hands dissevered had,
104  The stumps uplifting through the murky air,
105  So that the blood made horrible his face,

106  gridò: “Ricordera'ti anche del Mosca,
107  che disse, lasso! 'Capo ha cosa fatta,'
108  che fu mal seme per la gente tosca.”

106  Cried out: "Thou shalt remember Mosca also,
107  Who said, alas! 'A thing done has an end!'
108  Which was an ill seed for the Tuscan people."

109  E io li aggiunsi: “E morte di tua schiatta”;
110  per ch'elli, accumulando duol con duolo,
111  sen gio come persona trista e matta.

109  "And death unto thy race," thereto I added;
110  Whence he, accumulating woe on woe,
111  Departed, like a person sad and crazed.

112  Ma io rimasi a riguardar lo stuolo,
113  e vidi cosa ch'io avrei paura,
114  sanza più prova, di contarla solo;

112  But I remained to look upon the crowd;
113  And saw a thing which I should be afraid,
114  Without some further proof, even to recount,

115  se non che coscïenza m'assicura,
116  la buona compagnia che l'uom francheggia
117  sotto l'asbergo del sentirsi pura.

115  If it were not that conscience reassures me,
116  That good companion which emboldens man
117  Beneath the hauberk of its feeling pure.

118  Io vidi certo, e ancor par ch'io 'l veggia,
119  un busto sanza capo andar sì come
120  andavan li altri de la trista greggia;

118  I truly saw, and still I seem to see it,
119  A trunk without a head walk in like manner
120  As walked the others of the mournful herd.

121  e 'l capo tronco tenea per le chiome,
122  pesol con mano a guisa di lanterna:
123  e quel mirava noi e dicea: “Oh me!”

121  And by the hair it held the head dissevered,
122  Hung from the hand in fashion of a lantern,
123  And that upon us gazed and said: "O me!"

124  Di sé facea a sé stesso lucerna,
125  ed eran due in uno e uno in due;
126  com' esser può, quei sa che sì governa.

124  It of itself made to itself a lamp,
125  And they were two in one, and one in two;
126  How that can be, He knows who so ordains it.

127  Quando diritto al piè del ponte fue,
128  levò 'l braccio alto con tutta la testa
129  per appressarne le parole sue

127  When it was come close to the bridge's foot,
128  It lifted high its arm with all the head,
129  To bring more closely unto us its words,

130  che fuoro: “Or vedi la pena molesta,
131  tu che, spirando, vai veggendo i morti:
132  vedi s'alcuna è grande come questa.

130  Which were: "Behold now the sore penalty,
131  Thou, who dost breathing go the dead beholding;
132  Behold if any be as great as this.

133  E perché tu di me novella porti,
134  sappi ch'i' son Bertram dal Bornio, quelli
135  che diedi al re giovane i ma' conforti.

133  And so that thou may carry news of me,
134  Know that Bertram de Born am I, the same
135  Who gave to the Young King the evil comfort.

136  Io feci il padre e 'l figlio in sé ribelli;
137  Achitofèl non fé più d'Absalone
138  e di Davìd coi malvagi punzelli.

136  I made the father and the son rebellious;
137  Achitophel not more with Absalom
138  And David did with his accursed goadings.
 
139  Perch' io parti' così giunte persone,
140  partito porto il mio cerebro, lasso!,
141  dal suo principio ch'è in questo troncone.

139  Because I parted persons so united,
140  Parted do I now bear my brain, alas!
141  From its beginning, which is in this trunk.

142  Così s'osserva in me lo contrapasso.”

142  Thus is observed in me the counterpoise."

Canto XXIX
"They became what they beheld," a Blakean maxim, and we see at the beginning of Canto XXIX that Dante, the aspirant, is in danger of falling into this trap, of becoming fascinated by darkness and suffering.  Virgil rebukes him for it, and Dante rejects his rebuke.  But there's something to it, isn't there?  Because as readers, we too have long since become — not just ensnared by the wonder of Dante's poetic skills — but by the Hell he has revealed.  Dante says his eyes are inebriated, drunk, in an altered state, in which the eyes seek that which is inimical to them, i.e., darkness, then not seeing, they do the other thing they're known for: weep.  We return to a familiar theme.  If the people in Hell are there by Divine fiat, then pity for them is an ungodly response, a response that runs counter to the Divine will for justice.  For Hell is a place of justice, a place of perpetual violence and conflict, a continual war with no prospect of a conclusion in either victory or defeat.  This tiff between Virgil and Dante is also something we have seen before, and a great deal of insight is afforded the reader by noting those places in the text where the protagonists come closer to each other, and where, as here, they drift apart.  Dante, here, can be said to be perverse, in that he says to his teacher: "If you knew my motive, you would forgive me my seeming obsession."  There's a weird figuration here in line 10, of the moon being beneath their feet, mutability, night, the protagonists are walking on a timebomb.  They have a schedule to keep, something given to mortals, but not the shades of Hell.  That schedule is celestially maintained, and Virgil, as are many of the damned, seems to have a kind of metaposition on earthly Time, being able, to some extent, as say, we are in dreams, to look forward and backward through the medium, Time itself seeming to be a kind of enclosed, globe-like fishbowl, in which moments, from their perspective, are visible like the fish in the bowl.  Time is no longer a back-past moving always forward on a line, but a round and round kind of swirling ambiance through which mortals move, noting only their movements' directionality, and not the element which immerses them.  We are drowning in this Time, lost in it, compelled to move in its currents as passive sufferers, willless, in regards to shaping our own destinies.  Dante, the protagonist here, is in danger because he stops, and although we learn in the first line of the Canto the reason why he stops, that is to say, because his eyes (called "lights" here, not eyes in line 2) are drunk with the darkness and with tears, and he tells his guide that he is looking for a relative.  Virgil mentions the vast dimensions of Hell and the pressing nature of time, but Dante defies that assessment, and whether from curiosity or compassion, wishes to stay, risking his entire enterprise, and for what? or better, for whom?  For Geri del Bello, a father's cousin, a spirit malign who has already menaced Dante without his knowledge, and who now menaces him again by detaining him, and drawing his attention away from his teacher's guidance.  There's a great image here in which Virgil just walks away from Dante, while the latter follows after like a schoolboy, pleading.   Then in 22 - 24, the teacher says: 

22  Allor disse 'l maestro: “Non si franga
23  lo tuo pensier da qui innanzi sovr' ello.
24  Attendi ad altro, ed ei là si rimanga;

Longfellow translates franga as broken, but as English speakers we see the word frangible there, broken, yes, but broken as glass breaks.  Dante does not make the connection, that to ponder certain things too obsessively, as say the evil of an ancestor, is at best a distraction, and at worst, a snare.

Now, we have seen this theme of distraction before, and the text here, through Virgil, seems to be implying that distraction from one's calling is a great danger.  But is it?  For Dante, the poet, no.  Distraction too is part of the pattern he is creating.  An unreasonable implication, which Virgil does not seem to understand.  But Dante persists in his unreasonableness, and here we might find another Blakean maxim: "If a fool would persist in his folly, he would become wise."  The good student sometimes defies his teacher in order to learn what his teacher hasn't.  The reader is left to ponder if that is the case here, the light that guides him being only the lights of his own eyes.

Before Geri del Bello is ever given the chance to speak, Dante gives one more excuse: A blood feud.  An evil unavenged.  And Dante, a man exiled from his own wife and children, drenched in pity for this relative, once again sinks down to pity.  We have to remember "pity" has no pejorative sense here of condescension.  Pieta is what we feel when we see Michelangelo’s Virgin cradling on her lap her crucified son, and that is something quite different from the pity that we might feel for, as an example, the poet Villon, a condemned criminal.  Family is of course the ultimate excuse: I did it for my family, this, not patriotism, is perhaps the last refuge of a scoundrel.  So, on the spiritual path to liberation, we have to examine these connections.  Are the ties to family, the duty to family some kind of ultimate.  Here's what Jesus says about that:

31 There came then his brethren and his mother, and, standing without, sent unto him, calling him.
32 And the multitude sat about him, and they said unto him, Behold, thy mother and thy brethren without seek for thee.
33 And he answered them, saying, Who is my mother, or my brethren?
34 And he looked round about on them which sat about him, and said, Behold my mother and my brethren!
35 For whosoever shall do the will of God, the same is my brother, and my sister, and mother.

(I should like to add here, as an aside, the personification of Justice as a woman, which I think is the shadowside of Beatrice, the negative anima, as Beatrice is the positive one, if we were to view this feminine presense in a Jungian sense.)

Our allegiance to family, or city, or country becomes at some point in our spiritual lives a closed door, not an open one.  Dante and Virgil end this discussion by staring down into the darkness.  The aspirant, Dante, does not see, but a sound and a stench arises from the darkness.  He covers his ears, but he must breathe, and his sense of smell opens him, against his will, to the truth of this kind of filial devotion which trumps all else.  It is a coagulation of plagues, whose corruption may be hidden from the eyes, heard but not heeded, but still it announces itself in every breath we take.  This makes me think of how accustomed people become to the stench of air pollution, or how so-called good people could live near the crematoriums of a Nazi death camp, and claim no knowledge of those murderous proceedings.  It seems as if the senses of the mortal body are programmed to ignore that which offends them if they present things to us inimical to our most cherished beliefs.  It is the disease of the mind that it tries to make a remedy from the very fears which are eating into it like leprosy.

Dante, as a Christian, here uses the comparison from Ovid's description of plague ravaged Aegina, a plague that infected everything, right down to the worms in the ground, and whose utter despoliation of the island left it having to be repeopled by the seeds of ants ... all of this seriously brought forth in the text, primarily so that we have something fanciful with which to compare something that is actual.  Then the text reverts to the commonest household metaphors of pots and pans leaning against each other, or a stable boy currying a horse, or a man scaling fish ... as if to ground its truth in the ordinary, and thereby eschew the confabulations of the pagan poets.  Commentators often look at this insistence by Dante on the truth of his narrative as a kind of authorial leg-pulling, his tale being even more fantastic than the most fantastical of the pagan poets.  I think there is much more to it.  Dante is an Idealist, in the sense that the physical world is an epiphenomenon of the physical world, and it is through imagination as a spiritual vision that truth is found, not through fantasy, and certainly not through history.  These latter two being used, but used as one would subject a kind of useful beast to labor on one's behalf.  Dante has learned his lessons from the poets of old, but he means to surpass them, in the same way that the life of Jesus, through His incarnation as the Christ, has surpassed the pagan gods, which exist as mere products of human fancy.

Now, again, starting at line 94, Virgil tells the shades of the unique dispensation that he, as guide, and Dante, as a living man, have received so that they may traverse Hell without having to suffer Hells eternal punishment.  Just as Jesus allows others to call him the Messiah, so Dante allows Virgil to speak of his uniqueness.  Humility is thus preserved, as a form of homage given by others, and not as a boast that one makes of oneself.  This act by Virgil heals whatever split may have occurred between master and chela at the beginning of the canto, because now Virgil, from Dante's point of view, has returned to a subservient position.  He is teacher as guide, not Rabbi as Savior.  Virgil often forgets this, as does the Dante who is the aspirant.  But the Dante who is the poet never does.

Again, we come around to the question of identy: identiy as destiny, as the manifestation of Divine grace, or as an earthly name, a hellish crime and an eternal punishment.  Dante, the great psychologist, as he is the great metaphysician, is obsessed with this question, and this round and round, down and down, probing of Hell shows his relentless courage in following his obsession wherever it leads, no matter how brutal the truths discovered there.

With heavy irony, Dante returns the text to the question of inspiration, i.e., Griffolino d'Arezzo's story of suggesting fancy's flights, with the myth of Daedalus, with actual flight, the smoke given off by a physical body being burned at the stake.  Since fraud, and the counterfeiting of true metals by an alchemical subterfuge are the issues here, Griffolino is burned for a sin which he did not commit by a family member of his punisher — an accurser who is in actual fact a bastard, and not the son of the father who claims him.  In short: his punisher too is a counterfeit.  The true and the false are so closely set, that the false, as are the wild metaphors in Ovid, are often taken for the true.  The question of how we distinguish them in the text depends upon how penetrating we are as readers.  Dante is a poet, not a didactician.  His teaching goes much deeper than mere sermonizing, although one would be hard pressed to find a more effective sermonizer.  The final irony here is that the demon, Minos, is represented as infallible, an attribute given to popes, not a few of whom have we have encountered in Hell.  Here follows a catty remark about the gullibility of the Sienese and French, and we wonder, just how far Dante the poet is willing to go to show that Dante the aspirant still has a long way to go in the territory of forgiveness.  But what are we to make of this as readers?  Are we also being accused of being gullible if we ascribe to the literal, physical truth of Dante's vision?  If something does not fundamentally change inside of us as we read the Commedia, this may indeed be so.  As readers, we are so twisted into logical and narrative knots, that the only way we can escape these doublebinds is through an all-radiating revelation.

That revelation, for this canto, comes in the vary last line, when the counterfeiter, Capocchio, another victim of immolation, but this time for a crime he did commit, refers to himself as one who only aped the shape of a human being, being in fact something quite different than the shape he project.  The answer to the question posed before — that is to say, Who am I? — for these sinners, as also for so many of us as readers, is: I am the one who lies and suffers.    
  
   
1  La molta gente e le diverse piaghe
2  avean le luci mie sì inebrïate,
3  che de lo stare a piangere eran vaghe.

1  The many people and the divers wounds
2  These eyes of mine had so inebriated,
3  That they were wishful to stand still and weep;

4  Ma Virgilio mi disse: “Che pur guate?
5  perché la vista tua pur si soffolge
6  là giù tra l'ombre triste smozzicate?

4  But said Virgilius: "What dost thou still gaze at?
5  Why is thy sight still riveted down there
6  Among the mournful, mutilated shades?

7  Tu non hai fatto sì a l'altre bolge;
8  pensa, se tu annoverar le credi,
9  che miglia ventidue la valle volge.

7  Thou hast not done so at the other Bolge;
8  Consider, if to count them thou believest,
9  That two-and-twenty miles the valley winds,

10  E già la luna è sotto i nostri piedi;
11  lo tempo è poco omai che n'è concesso,
12  e altro è da veder che tu non vedi.”

10  And now the moon is underneath our feet;
11  Henceforth the time allotted us is brief,
12  And more is to be seen than what thou seest."

13  “Se tu avessi,” rispuos' io appresso,
14  “atteso a la cagion per ch'io guardava,
15  forse m'avresti ancor lo star dimesso.”

13  "If thou hadst," I made answer thereupon,
14  "Attended to the cause for which I looked,
15  Perhaps a longer stay thou wouldst have pardoned."

16  Parte sen giva, e io retro li andava,
17  lo duca, già faccendo la risposta,
18  e soggiugnendo: “Dentro a quella cava

16  Meanwhile my Guide departed, and behind him
17  I went, already making my reply,
18  And superadding: "In that cavern where

19  dov' io tenea or li occhi sì a posta,
20  credo ch'un spirto del mio sangue pianga
21  la colpa che là giù cotanto costa.”

19  I held mine eyes with such attention fixed,
20  I think a spirit of my blood laments
21  The sin which down below there costs so much."

22  Allor disse 'l maestro: “Non si franga
23  lo tuo pensier da qui innanzi sovr' ello.
24  Attendi ad altro, ed ei là si rimanga;

22  Then said the Master: "Be no longer broken
23  Thy thought from this time forward upon him;
24  Attend elsewhere, and there let him remain;

25  ch'io vidi lui a piè del ponticello
26  mostrarti e minacciar forte col dito,
27  e udi' 'l nominar Geri del Bello.

25  For him I saw below the little bridge,
26  Pointing at thee, and threatening with his finger
27  Fiercely, and heard him called Geri del Bello.

28  Tu eri allor sì del tutto impedito
29  sovra colui che già tenne Altaforte,
30  che non guardasti in là, sì fu partito.”

28  So wholly at that time wast thou impeded
29  By him who formerly held Altaforte,
30  Thou didst not look that way; so he departed."

31  “O duca mio, la vïolenta morte
32  che non li è vendicata ancor,” diss' io,
33  “per alcun che de l'onta sia consorte,

31  "O my Conductor, his own violent death,
32  Which is not yet avenged for him," I said,
33  "By any who is sharer in the shame,

34  fece lui disdegnoso; ond' el sen gio
35  sanza parlarmi, sì com' ïo estimo:
36  e in ciò m'ha el fatto a sé più pio.”

34  Made him disdainful; whence he went away,
35  As I imagine, without speaking to me,
36  And thereby made me pity him the more."

37  Così parlammo infino al loco primo
38  che de lo scoglio l'altra valle mostra,
39  se più lume vi fosse, tutto ad imo.

37  Thus did we speak as far as the first place
38  Upon the crag, which the next valley shows
39  Down to the bottom, if there were more light.

40  Quando noi fummo sor l'ultima chiostra
41  di Malebolge, sì che i suoi conversi
42  potean parere a la veduta nostra,

40  When we were now right over the last cloister
41  Of Malebolge, so that its lay-brothers
42  Could manifest themselves unto our sight,

43  lamenti saettaron me diversi,
44  che di pietà ferrati avean li strali;
45  ond' io li orecchi con le man copersi.

43  Divers lamentings pierced me through and through,
44  Which with compassion had their arrows barbed,
45  Whereat mine ears I covered with my hands.

46  Qual dolor fora, se de li spedali
47  di Valdichiana tra 'l luglio e 'l settembre
48  e di Maremma e di Sardigna i mali

46  What pain would be, if from the hospitals
47  Of Valdichiana, 'twixt July and September,
48  And of Maremma and Sardinia

49  fossero in una fossa tutti 'nsembre,
50  tal era quivi, e tal puzzo n'usciva
51  qual suol venir de le marcite membre.

49  All the diseases in one moat were gathered,
50  Such was it here, and such a stench came from it
51  As from putrescent limbs is wont to issue.

52  Noi discendemmo in su l'ultima riva
53  del lungo scoglio, pur da man sinistra;
54  e allor fu la mia vista più viva

52  We had descended on the furthest bank
53  From the long crag, upon the left hand still,
54  And then more vivid was my power of sight

55  giù ver' lo fondo, là 've la ministra
56  de l'alto Sire infallibil giustizia
57  punisce i falsador che qui registra.

55  Down tow'rds the bottom, where the ministress
56  Of the high Lord, Justice infallible,
57  Punishes forgers, which she here records.

58  Non credo ch'a veder maggior tristizia
59  fosse in Egina il popol tutto infermo,
60  quando fu l'aere sì pien di malizia,

58  I do not think a sadder sight to see
59  Was in Aegina the whole people sick,
60  (When was the air so full of pestilence,

61  che li animali, infino al picciol vermo,
62  cascaron tutti, e poi le genti antiche,
63  secondo che i poeti hanno per fermo,

61  The animals, down to the little worm,
62  All fell, and afterwards the ancient people,
63  According as the poets have affirmed,

64  si ristorar di seme di formiche;
65  ch'era a veder per quella oscura valle
66  languir li spirti per diverse biche.

64  Were from the seed of ants restored again,)
65  Than was it to behold through that dark valley
66  The spirits languishing in divers heaps.

67  Qual sovra 'l ventre e qual sovra le spalle
68  l'un de l'altro giacea, e qual carpone
69  si trasmutava per lo tristo calle.

67  This on the belly, that upon the back
68  One of the other lay, and others crawling
69  Shifted themselves along the dismal road.

70  Passo passo andavam sanza sermone,
71  guardando e ascoltando li ammalati,
72  che non potean levar le lor persone.

70  We step by step went onward without speech,
71  Gazing upon and listening to the sick
72  Who had not strength enough to lift their bodies.

73  Io vidi due sedere a sé poggiati,
74  com' a scaldar si poggia tegghia a tegghia,
75  dal capo al piè di schianze macolati;

73  I saw two sitting leaned against each other,
74  As leans in heating platter against platter,
75  From head to foot bespotted o'er with scabs;

76  e non vidi già mai menare stregghia
77  a ragazzo aspettato dal segnorso,
78  né a colui che mal volontier vegghia,

76  And never saw I plied a currycomb
77  By stable-boy for whom his master waits,
78  Or him who keeps awake unwillingly,

79  come ciascun menava spesso il morso
80  de l'unghie sopra sé per la gran rabbia
81  del pizzicor, che non ha più soccorso;

79  As every one was plying fast the bite
80  Of nails upon himself, for the great rage
81  Of itching which no other succour had.

82  e sì traevan giù l'unghie la scabbia,
83  come coltel di scardova le scaglie
84  o d'altro pesce che più larghe l'abbia.

82  And the nails downward with them dragged the scab,
83  In fashion as a knife the scales of bream,
84  Or any other fish that has them largest.

85  “O tu che con le dita ti dismaglie,”
86  cominciò 'l duca mio a l'un di loro,
87  “e che fai d'esse tal volta tanaglie,

85  "O thou, that with thy fingers dost dismail thee,"
86  Began my Leader unto one of them,
87  "And makest of them pincers now and then,

88  dinne s'alcun Latino è tra costoro
89  che son quinc' entro, se l'unghia ti basti
90  etternalmente a cotesto lavoro.”

88  Tell me if any Latian is with those
89  Who are herein; so may thy nails suffice thee
90  To all eternity unto this work."

91  “Latin siam noi, che tu vedi sì guasti
92  qui ambedue,” rispuose l'un piangendo;
93  “ma tu chi se' che di noi dimandasti?”

91  "Latians are we, whom thou so wasted seest,
92  Both of us here," one weeping made reply;
93  "But who art thou, that questionest about us?"

94  E 'l duca disse: “I' son un che discendo
95  con questo vivo giù di balzo in balzo,
96  e di mostrar lo 'nferno a lui intendo.”

94  And said the Guide: "One am I who descends
95  Down with this living man from cliff to cliff,
96  And I intend to show Hell unto him."

97  Allor si ruppe lo comun rincalzo;
98  e tremando ciascuno a me si volse
99  con altri che l'udiron di rimbalzo.

97  Then broken was their mutual support,
98  And trembling each one turned himself to me,
99  With others who had heard him by rebound.

100  Lo buon maestro a me tutto s'accolse,
101  dicendo: “Dì a lor ciò che tu vuoli”;
102  e io incominciai, poscia ch'ei volse:

100  Wholly to me did the good Master gather,
101  Saying: "Say unto them whate'er thou wishest."
102  And I began, since he would have it so:

103  “Se la vostra memoria non s'imboli
104  nel primo mondo da l'umane menti,
105  ma s'ella viva sotto molti soli,

103  "So may your memory not steal away
104  In the first world from out the minds of men,
105  But so may it survive 'neath many suns,

106  ditemi chi voi siete e di che genti;
107  la vostra sconcia e fastidiosa pena
108  di palesarvi a me non vi spaventi.”

106  Say to me who ye are, and of what people;
107  Let not your foul and loathsome punishment
108  Make you afraid to show yourselves to me."

109  “Io fui d'Arezzo, e Albero da Siena,”
110  rispuose l'un, “mi fé mettere al foco;
111  ma quel per ch'io mori' qui non mi mena.

109  "I of Arezzo was," one made reply,
110  "And Albert of Siena had me burned;
111  But what I died for does not bring me here.

112  Vero è ch'i' dissi lui, parlando a gioco:
113  'I' mi saprei levar per l'aere a volo';
114  e quei, ch'avea vaghezza e senno poco,

112  'Tis true I said to him, speaking in jest,
113  That I could rise by flight into the air,
114  And he who had conceit, but little wit,

115  volle ch'i' li mostrassi l'arte; e solo
116  perch' io nol feci Dedalo, mi fece
117  ardere a tal che l'avea per figliuolo.

115  Would have me show to him the art; and only
116  Because no Daedalus I made him, made me
117  Be burned by one who held him as his son.

118  Ma ne l'ultima bolgia de le diece
119  me per l'alchìmia che nel mondo usai
120  dannò Minòs, a cui fallar non lece.”

118  But unto the last Bolgia of the ten,
119  For alchemy, which in the world I practised,
120  Minos, who cannot err, has me condemned."

121  E io dissi al poeta: “Or fu già mai
122  gente sì vana come la sanese?
123  Certo non la francesca sì d'assai!”

121  And to the Poet said I: "Now was ever
122  So vain a people as the Sienese?
123  Not for a certainty the French by far."

124  Onde l'altro lebbroso, che m'intese,
125  rispuose al detto mio: “Tra'mene Stricca
126  che seppe far le temperate spese,

124  Whereat the other leper, who had heard me,
125  Replied unto my speech: "Taking out Stricca,
126  Who knew the art of moderate expenses,

127  e Niccolò che la costuma ricca
128  del garofano prima discoverse
129  ne l'orto dove tal seme s'appicca;

127  And Niccolo, who the luxurious use
128  Of cloves discovered earliest of all
129  Within that garden where such seed takes root;

130  e tra'ne la brigata in che disperse
131  Caccia d'Ascian la vigna e la gran fonda,
132  e l'Abbagliato suo senno proferse.

130  And taking out the band, among whom squandered
131  Caccia d'Ascian his vineyards and vast woods,
132  And where his wit the Abbagliato proffered!

133  Ma perché sappi chi sì ti seconda
134  ontra i Sanesi, aguzza ver' me l'occhio,
135  sì che la faccia mia ben ti risponda:

133  But, that thou know who thus doth second thee
134  Against the Sienese, make sharp thine eye
135  Tow'rds me, so that my face well answer thee,

136  sì vedrai ch'io son l'ombra di Capocchio,
137  che falsai li metalli con l'alchìmia;
138  e te dee ricordar, se ben t'adocchio,
136  And thou shalt see I am Capocchio's shade,
137  Who metals falsified by alchemy;
138  Thou must remember, if I well descry thee,



139  com' io fui di natura buona scimia.”

139  How I a skilful ape of nature was."

Canto XXX
There seems to be at least two directions by which one might navigate the landscape of the Self.  In one direction, there is disintegration, the self divides into conflicted and conflicting parts.  This is Dante's Hell.  These selves are perhaps the equivalent of Blake's spectre, a sociopathic sink of pure selfishness with insatiable needs which it tries to fulfill in a world of others, like itself, in a constant pointless war, which, far from satisfying those needs, becomes an end in itself: the idea of winning, and the ultimate form of winning becomes the spectre's ability to inflict the pain it is feeling on another.  (Blake calls this spectre the "reasoning power in man", because this power begins with the cloven fiction, that self and other are separate entities, the bad opposing your desires, and although there is no good per se, there might be those who are temporarily under your control to do your bidding, or those who have money or power that you can grab.  Why is this the reason?  Because it divides.  And it attempts to add part to part to establish the whole.  This is the symptom of a dividing mind, all of nature is broken into pieces of eat or be eaten fragments.)  In the other direction, there is integration.  Integration begins when the reader or aspirant realizes that all of these fragments are a part of a single Self, whom Dante calls God.  And here's where it gets interesting: Every moment of life is a choice-point wherein one may pivot towards disintegration or integration.  Here in Canto XXX, we see perhaps what is the most chaotic and conflicted crowd of sinners yet encountered.  They have different punishments, and they also punish each other as part of their own punishment.  They are all frauds of one stripe or another, but they taunt, flail at, and flay one another.  Whatever the person has desired is now moot, because his real desire is for vengeance, the absolute addictive need in inflict pain on others, or baring that, to witness the pain of others.   Master Adams is the poster boy for this kind of consciousness.   Here is a shade tormented by an insatiable thirst, although to fulfill that thirst would only increase the torment of his dropsy, a condition in which the suffer retains water.  Here is one who cannot move, and yet his one haunting desire is to search this immense area of Hell to find and see punished his partners in crime.  Here is one, whose has only two avenues of expression: his mouth, and one arm, both devoted to causing pain.
 
The destruction of marriage and the family begin the Canto, as Juno, jealous of Semele's affair with Jupiter (Zeus) destroys here rival through her rival's own excess of desire.  The myth being that Semele was a granted a wish, which Juno knew would destroy her (and also indirectly, Thebes).  The wish was to see Zeus in his actual form, a site so dazzling that it destroys whomever sees it.  Juno here is a negative anima figure, and like the sinners in this circle, she uses deceit to enact her jealous revenge.  A side note here is that there is a legend that Thebes was founded by the playing of a lyre that made the stones speak.  Dante compares Master Adams' body to that of a lute, and there might be a parody here of the seductive power of music, to do ill or good, and Master Adams is certainly a source of dissonance.  One thinks too of the Jesus remark in the gospels about palm Sunday, that the very stones would cry out if the people did not, and also, of course, of Orpheus.  Presumably we are reading here, not so much an exposition of the power of music, but that of the power of poetry, and the power of a propagandistic misuse of either art.  One myth has it that Semele was derived from a word meaning stimulus, which in this case meant whips and goads to drive people into a Dionysian frenzy.  Juno also destroys Athamas' family by driving him mad so that he mistakes his wife and children for a lioness and her cubs.  Male lions will sometimes kill the cubs of a rival male  — the jealousy theme brought to the ground of biology and evolution, where the motivation is only to have one's own genes survive, not that of defeated rivals.  On the female side of these family-destroying perversions, we also have the example of Myrrha attempting to trick her father into incest.  Dante also includes here the story of Hecuba.  Her daughter destroyed by sacrifices to a false God for the success of a vengeful expedition, her son also killed, Hecuba goes mad and barks like a dog (bitch).  The implication here is that as the ego is fragmented, and those integrating associations of citizenship and family are destroyed, an insanity ensues, the various fragmented parts reverting to the behavior of beasts (see line 24 on the "goading of beasts"  —  punger bestie).  The fraud, Gianni Schicchi, like a beast, drags off Capocchio, another beast, his prey.  Darwin, if he had read this canto, could not have failed to be impressed, and the old Victorian conception of Nature being "red in tooth and claw" would certainly find support for its axiom in the examples shown here.  

We're not going to get to the integration of these warring selves in the Inferno, but all through the Inferno, Dante, either by adhering to Virgil's "reason" or his own Christian conscience, is learning about that choice point referred to earlier.  And Virgil's one piece of advice, rather petulantly delivered toward the end of this canto that Dante's desire for experience is in danger of developing into a morbid curiosity.  It is one thing to know about sin, and quite another to be obsessed by it.  Remember, the choice point is to move towards more disintegration or more integration.  That choice point is called God's Judgement or God's Mercy, but nothing is destroyed.  Disintegration will never be reformed into integration unless this pivot point is negotiated wisely.  And we are learning throughout the Commedia that it pagan reason is by its very proliferation of deities can never supplant spiritual vision, which connects everything inviolable glory.  If we recall all these hear/see metaphors present throughout the Inferno, but especially in the earlier cantos, we can see that it is not only what we hear and what we see that moves us towards this unification of the self as Self, but how we hear and how we see.  

As we move deeper into the darkness of hell, Hell's absolute moral blindness and the terrible cacophony of Hell's constant shrieking, roaring and conflicted voices.  We see in the figure of Master Adams, who cannot move, what we have been seeing all along in the Inferno: an inability to learn, to change, to make any other choices.  Hell is a place devoted to an inflexible formula: transgression and retribution, it is the world of the spectre whose reason begins and ends with a false notion of identity (the constant theme of the Commedia), that who and what I am is only my desire for self-preservation, self-aggrandizement, and finally self-flagellation, that who and what I am is only a conglomerate of such desires.  If that is reason, the soul that learns cannot find blessedness here, but only instances of transgression and rules for retribution.  For blessed souls, those who have had that totally integrating vision which we call mystical union with ALL THAT IS, hell is simply irrelevant, and in fact unreal.  Saint Lucy or Beatrice can feel concern for Dante, a potential freed, and however mistaken, loving soul, but for the torments of the damned they feel nothing.  Pity is an emotion for the pain of the Christed or potentially Christed person being crucified by the conflicts of the everyday, mundane world, but not for those who initiate or perpetuate those conflicts.   

1  Nel tempo che Iunone era crucciata
2  per Semelè contra 'l sangue tebano,
3  come mostrò una e altra fïata,

1  'Twas at the time when Juno was enraged,
2  For Semele, against the Theban blood,
3  As she already more than once had shown,

4  Atamente divenne tanto insano,
5  che veggendo la moglie con due figli
6  andar carcata da ciascuna mano,

4  So reft of reason Athamas became,
5  That, seeing his own wife with children twain
6  Walking encumbered upon either hand,

7  gridò: “Tendiam le reti, sì ch'io pigli
8  la leonessa e ' leoncini al varco”;
9  e poi distese i dispietati artigli,

7  He cried: "Spread out the nets, that I may take
8  The lioness and her whelps upon the passage;"
9  And then extended his unpitying claws,

10  prendendo l'un ch'avea nome Learco,
11  e rotollo e percosselo ad un sasso;
12  e quella s'annegò con l'altro carco.

10  Seizing the first, who had the name Learchus,
11  And whirled him round, and dashed him on a rock;
12  And she, with the other burthen, drowned herself;—

13  E quando la fortuna volse in basso
14  l'altezza de' Troian che tutto ardiva,
15  sì che 'nsieme col regno il re fu casso,

And at the time when fortune downward hurled
The Trojan's arrogance, that all things dared,
So that the king was with his kingdom crushed,

16  Ecuba trista, misera e cattiva,
17  poscia che vide Polissena morta,
18  e del suo Polidoro in su la riva

16  Hecuba sad, disconsolate, and captive,
17  When lifeless she beheld Polyxena,
18  And of her Polydorus on the shore

19  del mar si fu la dolorosa accorta,
20  forsennata latrò sì come cane;
21  tanto il dolor le fè la mente torta.

19  Of ocean was the dolorous one aware,
20  Out of her senses like a dog she barked,
21  So much the anguish had her mind distorted;

22  Ma nè di Tebe furie nè troiane
23  si vider mäi in alcun tanto crude,
24  non punger bestie, nonché membra umane,

22  But not of Thebes the furies nor the Trojan
23  Were ever seen in any one so cruel
24  In goading beasts, and much more human members,

25  quant' io vidi in due ombre smorte e nude,
26  che mordendo correvan di quel modo
27  che 'l porco quando del porcil si schiude.

25  As I beheld two shadows pale and naked,
26  Who, biting, in the manner ran along
27  That a boar does, when from the sty turned loose.

28  L'una giunse a Capocchio, e in sul nodo
29  del collo l'assannò, sì che, tirando,
30  grattar li fece il ventre al fondo sodo.

28  One to Capocchio came, and by the nape
29  Seized with its teeth his neck, so that in dragging
30  It made his belly grate the solid bottom.

31  E l'Aretin che rimase, tremando
32  mi disse: “Quel folletto è Gianni Schicchi,
33  e va rabbioso altrui così conciando.”

31  And the Aretine, who trembling had remained,
32  Said to me: "That mad sprite is Gianni Schicchi,
33  And raving goes thus harrying other people."

34  “Oh,” diss' io lui, “se l'altro non ti ficchi
35  li denti a dosso, non ti sia fatica
36  a dir chi è, pria che di qui si spicchi.”

34  "O," said I to him, "so may not the other
35  Set teeth on thee, let it not weary thee
36  To tell us who it is, ere it dart hence."

37  Ed elli a me: “Quell' è l'anima antica
38  di Mirra scellerata, che divenne
39  al padre, fuor del dritto amore, amica.

37  And he to me: "That is the ancient ghost
38  Of the nefarious Myrrha, who became
39  Beyond all rightful love her father's lover.

40  Questa a peccar con esso così venne,
41  falsificando sè in altrui forma,
42  come l'altro che là sen va, sostenne,

40  She came to sin with him after this manner,
41  By counterfeiting of another's form;
42  As he who goeth yonder undertook,

43  per guadagnar la donna de la torma,
44  falsificare in sè Buoso Donati,
45  testando e dando al testamento norma.”

43  That he might gain the lady of the herd,
44  To counterfeit in himself Buoso Donati,
45  Making a will and giving it due form."

46  E poi che i due rabbiosi fuor passati
47  sovra cu' io avea l'occhio tenuto,
48  rivolsilo a guardar li altri mal nati.

46  And after the two maniacs had passed
47  On whom I held mine eye, I turned it back
48  To look upon the other evil-born.

49  Io vidi un, fatto a guisa di lëuto,
50  pur ch'elli avesse avuta l'anguinaia
51  tronca da l'altro che l'uomo ha forcuto.

49  I saw one made in fashion of a lute,
50  If he had only had the groin cut off
51  Just at the point at which a man is forked.

52  La grave idropesì, che sì dispaia
53  le membra con l'omor che mal converte,
54  che 'l viso non risponde a la ventraia,

52  The heavy dropsy, that so disproportions
53  The limbs with humours, which it ill concocts,
54  That the face corresponds not to the belly,

55  faceva lui tener le labbra aperte
56  come l'etico fa, che per la sete
57  l'un verso 'l mento e l'altro in sù rinverte.

55  Compelled him so to hold his lips apart
56  As does the hectic, who because of thirst
57  One tow'rds the chin, the other upward turns.

58  “O voi che sanz' alcuna pena siete,
59  e non so io perché, nel mondo gramo,”
60  diss' elli a noi, “guardate e attendete

58  "O ye, who without any torment are,
59  And why I know not, in the world of woe,"
60  He said to us, "behold, and be attentive

61  a la miseria del maestro Adamo;
62  io ebbi, vivo, assai di quel ch'i' volli,
63  e ora, lasso!, un gocciol d'acqua bramo.

61  Unto the misery of Master Adam;
62  I had while living much of what I wished,
63  And now, alas! a drop of water crave.

64  Li ruscelletti che d'i verdi colli
65  del Casentin discendon giuso in Arno,
66  faccendo i lor canali freddi e molli,

64  The rivulets, that from the verdant hills
65  Of Cassentin descend down into Arno,
66  Making their channels to be cold and moist,

67  sempre mi stanno innanzi, e non indarno,
68  chè l'imagine lor vie più m'asciuga
69  che 'l male ond' io nel volto mi discarno.

67  Ever before me stand, and not in vain;
68  For far more doth their image dry me up
69  Than the disease which strips my face of flesh.

70  La rigida giustizia che mi fruga
71  tragge cagion del loco ov' io peccai
72  a metter più li miei sospiri in fuga.

70  The rigid justice that chastises me
71  Draweth occasion from the place in which
72  I sinned, to put the more my sighs in flight.

73  Ivi è Romena, là dov' io falsai
74  la lega suggellata del Batista;
75  per ch'io il corpo sù arso lasciai.

73  There is Romena, where I counterfeited
74  The currency imprinted with the Baptist,
75  For which I left my body burned above.

76  Ma s'io vedessi qui l'anima trista
77  di Guido o d'Alessandro o di lor frate,
78  per Fonte Branda non darei la vista.

76  But if I here could see the tristful soul
77  Of Guido, or Alessandro, or their brother,
78  For Branda's fount I would not give the sight.

79  Dentro c'è l'una già, se l'arrabbiate
80  ombre che vanno intorno dicon vero;
81  ma che mi val, c'ho le membra legate?

79  One is within already, if the raving
80  Shades that are going round about speak truth;
81  But what avails it me, whose limbs are tied?

82  S'io fossi pur di tanto ancor leggero
83  ch'i' potessi in cent' anni andare un'oncia,
84  io sarei messo già per lo sentiero,

82  If I were only still so light, that in
83  A hundred years I could advance one inch,
84  I had already started on the way,

85  cercando lui tra questa gente sconcia,
86  con tutto ch'ella volge undici miglia,
87  e men d'un mezzo di traverso non ci ha.

85  Seeking him out among this squalid folk,
86  Although the circuit be eleven miles,
87  And be not less than half a mile across.

88  Io son per lor tra sì fatta famiglia;
89  e' m'indussero a batter li fiorini
90  ch'avevan tre carati di mondiglia.”

88  For them am I in such a family;
89  They did induce me into coining florins,
90  Which had three carats of impurity."

91  E io a lui: “Chi son li due tapini
92  che fumman come man bagnate 'l verno,
93  giacendo stretti a' tuoi destri confini?”

91  And I to him: "Who are the two poor wretches
92  That smoke like unto a wet hand in winter,
93  Lying there close upon thy right-hand confines?"

94  “Qui li trovai – e poi volta non dierno –,”
95  rispuose, “quando piovvi in questo greppo,
96  e non credo che dieno in sempiterno.

94  "I found them here," replied he, "when I rained
95  Into this chasm, and since they have not turned,
96  Nor do I think they will for evermore.

97  L'una è la falsa ch'accusò Gioseppo;
98  l'altr' è 'l falso Sinon greco di Troia:
99  per febbre aguta gittan tanto leppo.”

97  One the false woman is who accused Joseph,
98  The other the false Sinon, Greek of Troy;
99  From acute fever they send forth such reek."

100  E l'un di lor, che si recò a noia
101  forse d'esser nomato sì oscuro,
102  col pugno li percosse l'epa croia.

100  And one of them, who felt himself annoyed
101  At being, peradventure, named so darkly,
102  Smote with the fist upon his hardened paunch.

103  Quella sonò come fosse un tamburo;
104  e mastro Adamo li percosse il volto
105  col braccio suo, che non parve men duro,

103  It gave a sound, as if it were a drum;
104  And Master Adam smote him in the face,
105  With arm that did not seem to be less hard,

106  dicendo a lui: “Ancor che mi sia tolto
107  lo muover per le membra che son gravi,
108  ho io il braccio a tal mestiere sciolto.”

106  Saying to him: "Although be taken from me
107  All motion, for my limbs that heavy are,
108  I have an arm unfettered for such need."

109  Ond' ei rispuose: “Quando tu andavi
110  al fuoco, non l'avei tu così presto;
111  ma sì e più l'avei quando coniavi.”

109  Whereat he answer made: "When thou didst go
110  Unto the fire, thou hadst it not so ready:
111  But hadst it so and more when thou wast coining."

112  E l'idropico: “Tu di' ver di questo:
113  ma tu non fosti sì ver testimonio
114  là 've del ver fosti a Troia richesto.”

112  The dropsical: "Thou sayest true in that;
113  But thou wast not so true a witness there,
114  Where thou wast questioned of the truth at Troy."

115  “S'io dissi falso, e tu falsasti il conio,”
116  disse Sinon; “e son qui per un fallo,
117  e tu per più ch'alcun altro demonio!”

115  "If I spake false, thou falsifiedst the coin,"
116  Said Sinon; "and for one fault I am here,
117  And thou for more than any other demon."

118  “Ricorditi, spergiuro, del cavallo,”
119  rispuose quel ch'avëa infiata l'epa;
120  “e sieti reo che tutto il mondo sallo!”

118  "Remember, perjurer, about the horse,"
119  He made reply who had the swollen belly,
120  "And rueful be it thee the whole world knows it."

121  “E te sia rea la sete onde ti crepa,”
122  disse 'l Greco, “la lingua, e l'acqua marcia
123  che 'l ventre innanzi a li occhi sì t'assiepa!”

121  "Rueful to thee the thirst be wherewith cracks
122  Thy tongue," the Greek said, "and the putrid water
123  That hedges so thy paunch before thine eyes."

124  Allora il monetier: “Così si squarcia
125  la bocca tua per tuo mal come suole;
126  chè, s'i' ho sete e omor mi rinfarcia,

124  Then the false-coiner: "So is gaping wide
125  Thy mouth for speaking evil, as 'tis wont;
126  Because if I have thirst, and humour stuff me

127  tu hai l'arsura e 'l capo che ti duole,
128  e per leccar lo specchio di Narcisso,
129  non vorresti a 'nvitar molte parole.”

127  Thou hast the burning and the head that aches,
128  And to lick up the mirror of Narcissus
129  Thou wouldst not want words many to invite thee."

130  Ad ascoltarli er' io del tutto fisso,
132  quando 'l maestro mi disse: “Or pur mira,
133  che per poco che teco non mi risso!”

130  In listening to them was I wholly fixed,
131  When said the Master to me: "Now just look,
132  For little wants it that I quarrel with thee."

133  Quand' io 'l senti' a me parlar con ira,
134  volsimi verso lui con tal vergogna,
135  ch'ancor per la memoria mi si gira.

133  When him I heard in anger speak to me,
134  I turned me round towards him with such shame
135  That still it eddies through my memory.

136  Qual è colui che suo dannaggio sogna,
137  che sognando desidera sognare,
138  ì che quel ch'è, come non fosse, agogna,

136  And as he is who dreams of his own harm,
137  Who dreaming wishes it may be a dream,
138  So that he craves what is, as if it were not;

139  tal mi fec' io, non possendo parlare,
140  che disïava scusarmi, e scusava
141  me tuttavia, e nol mi credea fare.

139  Such I became, not having power to speak,
140  For to excuse myself I wished, and still
141  Excused myself, and did not think I did it.

142  “Maggior difetto men vergogna lava,”
143  disse 'l maestro, “che 'l tuo non è stato;
144  però d'ogne trestizia ti disgrava.

142  "Less shame doth wash away a greater fault,"
143  The Master said, "than this of thine has been;
144  Therefore thyself disburden of all sadness,

145  E fa ragion ch'io ti sia sempre allato,
146  se più avvien che fortuna t'accoglia
147  dove sien genti in simigliante piato:

145  And make account that I am aye beside thee,
146  If e'er it come to pass that fortune bring thee
147  Where there are people in a like dispute;

148  chè voler ciò udire è bassa voglia.”

146  For a base wish it is to wish to hear it."

Canto XXXI
Canto XXXI is a bridge.  For several cantos now, the text has been carefully extending bridge material, the overlapping of material from one canto to another becoming something more here than a kind of musical blending of themes, so that here, for the first time, an entire canto becomes a bridge from Malebolgia, the 8th circle, to the 9th and final circle of the Inferno.  The Canto is about Gigantism, or in Jungian terms inflation.  The key lines here 55-57 talk about power and evil uncontrolled by "argument", that is language.  In our times, we know that power and evil can be distorted by propaganda, the big lie, as the Nazi called it, which people will believe better than the little lie.  One could say that the chief fraud is the use of language to convince others that your betrayal will be in their best interests.  Governments, parents, advertisers, churches and educational systems, are all giants compared to the individual, and all of them perpetrate this fraud.  This sin is a social one, not just the sin of individual will, and there is a way that the Giants in this canto are more like social forces acting in an entity-like manner, but essentially only representative of collective passions that overwhelm individuals, belittle people at the bottom of the social hierarchy and inflating people at the top.  These passions are both mindless, compassionless, and infantile.  They are tantrum energies, composed of selfishness, frustration, rage, and the irrational defensiveness which sprouts from fear — or as Dante the aspirant puts it, in sort of an Ernst Becker Denial of Death sort of way:

109  Then was I more afraid of death than ever,
110  For nothing more was needful than the fear ...

Dante was very prescient in terms of what was later called depth psychology, and also in terms of what Vico described in the New Science as the primitive, pre-linguistic state of human beings.  He had a very sophisticated view of the operations of language, vis a vis, its own protean nature (the same words may be used to hurt and to heal), and also how it operates as a refinement, or as Freud might have said, a displacement of highly charged emotions.  Here, Dante shows us that perception is a matter of position, problems near to us appear differently than problems distant from us.  The accuracy of perceptions is also determined by such things as darkness, fog, or murkiness, all of which conditions are in effect here.  Language, such as Virgil's explanation here to Dante as to the true nature of what Dante first perceives as defensive towers, but which are actually Giants, is the mediating force.  Through the proper use of language we can correct our sense perceptions, and even influence our emotions.  

The Giants generate fear in Dante, the aspirant, and as such they are the projected embodiments of that emotion, which is paramount in Hell.  Vico says that emotions are primal, not perceptions, because they are infantile, and if you have ever tried to calm a toddler in the midst of an inconsolable crying jag, you know that for them emotions supersede perceptions, in that it is difficult to distract them with a toy, and even more difficult to console them with mere words.  Both for Vico and Dante, emotions, especially rage and fear, are so big, so self-enclosing and so self-aggrandizing, that they may render language both incomprehensible and irrelevant.  If you check inside yourself, you will discover that this true: first we feel, and that feeling colors perception, and those perceptions evolve into rationales — which look like reason, but on close examination, are not logical at all, but rather outgrowths of, and attempts to, harness the energy of an underlying emotion.  Which may be why philosophy, for Dante, is a sort of denatured poetry, since it attempts to depotentiate its own seed of emotion, and thereby ignore its own genesis and foundation.

I think it is also telling that the Giants here, with the exception of Antaeus, are half-hidden, and bound.  Why  half-hidden?  Why bound?  Because what they display in their deluded states is a kind of projected egotistical power originating in their hidden or unconscious motive parts.  As we have seen throughout hell, they are stuck, not so much like organic entities or even shades, but more like towers, edifices fixed to the earth and without any volitional power to move.  There are four giants mentioned, each of which operates in the psyche of the reader in a slightly different way.  Nimrod, the inarticulate victim of his own inflationary pride, attempts to reach and perhaps even steal the creative power of the Word of God, through a kind of effusive self-aggrandizement, that is to say, egotistical boasting.   Ephialtes, not so much through the power of words, but through a strength of deeds, discovers that no egotistical action has the power to supersede the Jungian Self, or Soul.  Think of those celebrities who are rich with accomplishments and praise, but who nevertheless commit suicide, or otherwise self-destruct.  And Briareus, whom Dante wishes to see, and whom Virgil promises that he will see, but whom he does not see.  Why?  Because Virgil has given an outlandish (i.e., pagan hyperbole, fictional) account of him in the Aeneid as  One "with a hundred arms and hands and breathes fire from fifty mouths and breasts."  The description is an exaggeration for effect, and cannot be verified by actual experience.  The point here is a warning to poets, whose job is not to convince readers as propagandists or advertisers do, but to show the truth of the psyche, the soul.  
Now we come to Antaeus.  He is the only giant with the motive power to provide a bridge (back to the issue of bridges, or connective tissue, or vehicles, like ships, of conveyance) to the deepest, most alien, most primitive and selfish level of the psyche: Cocytus (etymologically derived from the Greek: lamentation).  Antaeus' sin may be pride and the destruction of nature (He is the slayer of a thousand lions, but he did not sin directly against God, he did not take up arms against Rome, the eternal city.  However strong Antaeus is, he was controlled by his mother Gea, the anima.  He is reachable, persuadable, but how?  How do you control a giant egotist?  Through flattery, cajolery, praise.  Yes.  But Virgil tries all of these, yet still falls short, until he tells the giant that Dante, still a living man, can add to his fame in the world.  The idea of fame controls the giant.  It may not humble him, but it makes him kneel, if not in prayer, at least in service.  Still it must be noted that it is only the idea of fame which is operational here, fame itself will do nothing to alleviate these primitive emotions.

Note: The last image of Antaeus rising up like the mast of a ship that rights itself when an uneven load is released, foreshadows the ship of the angel who is porting the souls to Purgatory, and also recalls the image in Canto I of Inferno of the swimmer who almost drowned and looks back upon reaching shore at the water that almost drowned him. 
  
1  Una medesma lingua pria mi morse,
2  sì che mi tinse l'una e l'altra guancia,
3  e poi la medicina mi riporse;

1  One and the selfsame tongue first wounded me,
2  So that it tinged the one cheek and the other,
3  And then held out to me the medicine;

4  così od' io che solea far la lancia
5  d'Achille e del suo padre esser cagione
6  prima di trista e poi di buona mancia.

4  Thus do I hear that once Achilles' spear,
5  His and his father's, used to be the cause
6  First of a sad and then a gracious boon.

7  Noi demmo il dosso al misero vallone
8  su per la ripa che 'l cinge dintorno,
9  attraversando sanza alcun sermone.

7  We turned our backs upon the wretched valley,
8  Upon the bank that girds it round about,
9  Going across it without any speech.

10  Quiv' era men che notte e men che giorno,
11  sì che 'l viso m'andava innanzi poco;
12  ma io senti' sonare un alto corno,

10  There it was less than night, and less than day,
11  So that my sight went little in advance;
12  But I could hear the blare of a loud horn,

13  tanto ch'avrebbe ogne tuon fatto fioco,
14  che, contra sé la sua via seguitando,
15  dirizzò li occhi miei tutti ad un loco.

13  So loud it would have made each thunder faint,
14  Which, counter to it following its way,
15  Mine eyes directed wholly to one place.

16  Dopo la dolorosa rotta, quando
17  Carlo Magno perdé la santa gesta,
18  non sonò sì terribilmente Orlando.

16  After the dolorous discomfiture
17  When Charlemagne the holy emprise lost,
18  So terribly Orlando sounded not.

19  Poco portäi in là volta la testa,
20  che me parve veder molte alte torri;
21  ond' io: “Maestro, dì, che terra è questa?”

19  Short while my head turned thitherward I held
20  When many lofty towers I seemed to see,
21  Whereat I: "Master, say, what town is this?"

22  Ed elli a me: “Però che tu trascorri
23  per le tenebre troppo da la lungi,
24  avvien che poi nel maginare abborri.

22  And he to me: "Because thou peerest forth
23  Athwart the darkness at too great a distance,
24  It happens that thou errest in thy fancy.

25  Tu vedrai ben, se tu là ti congiungi,
26  quanto 'l senso s'inganna di lontano;
27  però alquanto più te stesso pungi.”

25  Well shalt thou see, if thou arrivest there,
26  How much the sense deceives itself by distance;
27  Therefore a little faster spur thee on."

28  Poi caramente mi prese per mano
29  e disse: “Pria che noi siam più avanti,
30  acciò che 'l fatto men ti paia strano,

28  Then tenderly he took me by the hand,
29  And said: "Before we farther have advanced,
30  That the reality may seem to thee

31  sappi che non son torri, ma giganti,
32  e son nel pozzo intorno da la ripa
33  da l'umbilico in giuso tutti quanti.”

31  Less strange, know that these are not towers, but giants,
32  And they are in the well, around the bank,
33  From navel downward, one and all of them."

34  Come quando la nebbia si dissipa,
35  lo sguardo a poco a poco raffigura
36  ciò che cela 'l vapor che l'aere stipa,

34  As, when the fog is vanishing away,
35  Little by little doth the sight refigure
36  Whate'er the mist that crowds the air conceals,

37  così forando l'aura grossa e scura,
38  più e più appressando ver' la sponda,
39  fuggiemi errore e cresciemi paura;

37  So, piercing through the dense and darksome air,
38  More and more near approaching tow'rd the verge,
39  My error fled, and fear came over me;

40  però che, come su la cerchia tonda
41  Montereggion di torri si corona,
42  così la proda che 'l pozzo circonda

40  Because as on its circular parapets
41  Montereggione crowns itself with towers,
42  E'en thus the margin which surrounds the well

43  torreggiavan di mezza la persona
44  li orribili giganti, cui minaccia
45  Giove del cielo ancora quando tuona.

43  With one half of their bodies turreted
44  The horrible giants, whom Jove menaces
45  E'en now from out the heavens when he thunders.

46  E io scorgeva già d'alcun la faccia,
47  le spalle e 'l petto e del ventre gran parte,
48  e per le coste giù ambo le braccia.

46  And I of one already saw the face,
47  Shoulders, and breast, and great part of the belly,
48  And down along his sides both of the arms.

49  Natura certo, quando lasciò l'arte
50  di si fatti animali, assai fé bene
51  per tòrre tali essecutori a Marte.

49  Certainly Nature, when she left the making
50  Of animals like these, did well indeed,
51  By taking such executors from Mars;

52  E s'ella d'elefanti e di balene
53  non si pente, chi guarda sottilmente,
54  più giusta e più discreta la ne tene;

52  And if of elephants and whales she doth not
53  Repent her, whosoever looketh subtly
54  More just and more discreet will hold her for it;

55  ché dove l'argomento de la mente
56  s'aggiugne al mal volere e a la possa,
57  nessun riparo vi può far la gente.

55  For where the argument of intellect
56  Is added unto evil will and power,
57  No rampart can the people make against it.

58  La faccia sua mi parea lunga e grossa
59  come la pina di San Pietro a Roma,
60  e a sua proporzione eran l'altre ossa;

58  His face appeared to me as long and large
59  As is at Rome the pine-cone of Saint Peter's,
60  And in proportion were the other bones;

61  sì che la ripa, ch'era perizoma
62  dal mezzo in giù, ne mostrava ben tanto
63  di sovra, che di giugnere a la chioma

61  So that the margin, which an apron was
62  Down from the middle, showed so much of him
63  Above it, that to reach up to his hair

64  tre Frison s'averien dato mal vanto;
65  però ch'i' ne vedea trenta gran palmi
66  dal loco in giù dov' omo affibbia 'l manto.

64  Three Frieslanders in vain had vaunted them;
65  For I beheld thirty great palms of him
66  Down from the place where man his mantle buckles.

67  “Raphèl maì amècche zabì almi,”
68  cominciò a gridar la fiera bocca,
69  cui non si convenia più dolci salmi.

67  "Raphael mai amech izabi almi,"
68  Began to clamour the ferocious mouth,
69  To which were not befitting sweeter psalms.

70  E 'l duca mio ver' lui: “Anima sciocca,
71  tienti col corno, e con quel ti disfoga
72  quand' ira o altra passïon ti tocca!

70  And unto him my Guide: "Soul idiotic,
71  Keep to thy horn, and vent thyself with that,
72  When wrath or other passion touches thee.

73  Cèrcati al collo, e troverai la soga
74  che 'l tien legato, o anima confusa,
75  e vedi lui che 'l gran petto ti doga.”

73  Search round thy neck, and thou wilt find the belt
74  Which keeps it fastened, O bewildered soul,
75  And see it, where it bars thy mighty breast."

76  Poi disse a me: “Elli stessi s'accusa;
77  questi è Nembrotto per lo cui mal coto
78  pur un linguaggio nel mondo non s'usa.

76  Then said to me: "He doth himself accuse;
77  This one is Nimrod, by whose evil thought
78  One language in the world is not still used.

79  Lasciànlo stare e non parliamo a vòto;
80  ché così è a lui ciascun linguaggio
81  come 'l suo ad altrui, ch'a nullo è noto.”

79  Here let us leave him and not speak in vain;
80  For even such to him is every language
81  As his to others, which to none is known."

82  Facemmo adunque più lungo vïaggio,
83  vòlti a sinistra; e al trar d'un balestro
84  trovammo l'altro assai più fero e maggio.

82  Therefore a longer journey did we make,
83  Turned to the left, and a crossbow-shot oft
84  We found another far more fierce and large.

85  A cigner lui qual che fosse 'l maestro,
86  non so io dir, ma el tenea soccinto
87  dinanzi l'altro e dietro il braccio destro

85  In binding him, who might the master be
86  I cannot say; but he had pinioned close
87  Behind the right arm, and in front the other,

88  d'una catena che 'l tenea avvinto
89  dal collo in giù, sì che 'n su lo scoperto
90  si ravvolgëa infino al giro quinto.

88  With chains, that held him so begirt about
89  From the neck down, that on the part uncovered
90  It wound itself as far as the fifth gyre.

91  “Questo superbo volle esser esperto
92  di sua potenza contra 'l sommo Giove,”
93  disse 'l mio duca, “ond' elli ha cotal merto.

91  "This proud one wished to make experiment
92  Of his own power against the Supreme Jove,"
93  My Leader said, "whence he has such a guerdon.

94  Fïalte ha nome, e fece le gran prove
95  quando i giganti fer paura a' dèi;
96  le braccia ch'el menò, già mai non move.”

94  Ephialtes is his name; he showed great prowess.
95  What time the giants terrified the gods;
96  The arms he wielded never more he moves."

97  E io a lui: “S'esser puote, io vorrei
98  che de lo smisurato Brïareo
99  esperïenza avesser li occhi mei.”

97  And I to him: "If possible, I should wish
98  That of the measureless Briareus
99  These eyes of mine might have experience."

100  Ond' ei rispuose: “Tu vedrai Anteo
101  presso di qui che parla ed è disciolto,
102  che ne porrà nel fondo d'ogne reo.

100  Whence he replied: "Thou shalt behold Antaeus
101  Close by here, who can speak and is unbound,
102  Who at the bottom of all crime shall place us.

103  Quel che tu vuo' veder, più là è molto
104  ed è legato e fatto come questo,
105  salvo che più feroce par nel volto.”

103  Much farther yon is he whom thou wouldst see,
104  And he is bound, and fashioned like to this one,
105  Save that he seems in aspect more ferocious."

106  Non fu tremoto già tanto rubesto,
107  che scotesse una torre così forte,
108  come Fïalte a scuotersi fu presto.

106  There never was an earthquake of such might
107  That it could shake a tower so violently,
108  As Ephialtes suddenly shook himself.

109  Allor temett' io più che mai la morte,
110  e non v'era mestier più che la dotta,
111  s'io non avessi viste le ritorte.

109  Then was I more afraid of death than ever,
110  For nothing more was needful than the fear,
111  If I had not beheld the manacles.

112  Noi procedemmo più avante allotta,
113  e venimmo ad Anteo, che ben cinque alle,
114  sanza la testa, uscia fuor de la grotta.

112  Then we proceeded farther in advance,
113  And to Antaeus came, who, full five ells
114  Without the head, forth issued from the cavern.

115  “O tu che ne la fortunata valle
116  che fece Scipïon di gloria reda,
117  quand' Anibàl co' suoi diede le spalle,

115  "O thou, who in the valley fortunate,
116  Which Scipio the heir of glory made,
117  When Hannibal turned back with all his hosts,

118  recasti già mille leon per preda,
119  e che, se fossi stato a l'alta guerra
120  de' tuoi fratelli, ancor par che si creda

118  Once brought'st a thousand lions for thy prey,
119  And who, hadst thou been at the mighty war
120  Among thy brothers, some it seems still think

121  ch'avrebber vinto i figli de la terra:
122  mettine giù, e non ten vegna schifo,
123  dove Cocito la freddura serra.

121  The sons of Earth the victory would have gained:
122  Place us below, nor be disdainful of it,
123  There where the cold doth lock Cocytus up.

124  Non ci fare ire a Tizio né a Tifo:
125  questi può dar di quel che qui si brama;
126  però ti china e non torcer lo grifo.

124  Make us not go to Tityus nor Typhoeus;
125  This one can give of that which here is longed for;
126  Therefore stoop down, and do not curl thy lip.

127  Ancor ti può nel mondo render fama,
128  ch'el vive, e lunga vita ancor aspetta
129  se 'nnanzi tempo grazia a sé nol chiama.”

127  Still in the world can he restore thy fame;
128  Because he lives, and still expects long life,
129  If to itself Grace call him not untimely."

130  Così disse 'l maestro; e quelli in fretta
131  le man distese, e prese 'l duca mio,
132  ond' Ercule sentì già grande stretta.

130  So said the Master; and in haste the other
132  His hands extended and took up my Guide,—
133  Hands whose great pressure Hercules once felt.

133  Virgilio, quando prender si sentio,
134  disse a me: “Fatti qua, sì ch'io ti prenda”;
135  poi fece sì ch'un fascio era elli e io.

133  Virgilius, when he felt himself embraced,
134  Said unto me: "Draw nigh, that I may take thee;"
135  Then of himself and me one bundle made.

136  Qual pare a riguardar la Carisenda
137  sotto 'l chinato, quando un nuvol vada
138  sovr' essa sì, ched ella incontro penda:

136  As seems the Carisenda, to behold
137  Beneath the leaning side, when goes a cloud
138  Above it so that opposite it hangs;

139  tal parve Antëo a me che stava a bada
140  di vederlo chinare, e fu tal ora
141  ch'i' avrei voluto ir per altra strada.
139  Such did Antaeus seem to me, who stood
140  Watching to see him stoop, and then it was
142  I could have wished to go some other way.

142  Ma lievemente al fondo che divora
143  Lucifero con Giuda, ci sposò;
144  né, sì chinato, li fece dimora,

142  But lightly in the abyss, which swallows up
143  Judas with Lucifer, he put us down;
144  Nor thus bowed downward made he there delay,

145  e come albero in nave si levò.

145  But, as a mast does in a ship, uprose.

Canto XXXII
Canto  32 begins with an invocation, so we have to ask, what is the purpose of this invocation or for that matter of any invocation?  Always it is to show that the weightiness of the theme requires more than an ordinary human skill to do it justice.  Dante is doing that too, but he is doing something else as well.  He seems to be distancing  the language of his poetry from the horrid conditions he is trying to describe.  In verses four through six , he invites the reader to imagine or, more precisely, to conceive of, a geography of feelings more complicated and terrible then any language has ever evolved to describe.  He uses a marvelous metaphor here, as if his subject matter were a kind of rock hard fruit that his poetry squeezes into the juice of  art.  Always the conception of any attentive writer is as full of detail and connections as reality itself, and to write effectively the essence of all that complexity must be juicy from the meaning of a few words.  This is far from child’s play, and Dante tells us so explicitly in verse nine: Hell is not a place that yields it’s secrets to baby talkers.  Well then, what kind of language is appropriate?  The kind that can communicate with stones, and animate them to the level of human will.  The reference, which is alluded to here, is to Christ’s assertion on Palm Sunday that if the people were silent, the very stones would cry out.  Dante’s classical reference to Amphion’s music bewitching stones to build the walls of Thebes is the overt expression through which the reader sees the deeper conception Christ, which, if Dante we’re proud, i. e., a pagan poet, he would have alluded to boastfully.  Here he achieves the same effect humbly because the reader makes the association by means of the subtle inference.  Who are the ladies whom he invokes to aid him? Those that aided Amphion?  Maybe.  But maybe Dante is seeing, through the semi-transparent veil of the classical muses, the more penetrating lights of Beatrice, St. Lucy, and the Virgin Mary.  Dante’s convoluted irony here surely has a deeper purpose.  The Commedia is not a poem constructed from pagan pride, a lesson the aspirant would have learned in the previous canto from seeing the fate of Nimrod.  In fact, in this canto Virgil is asked to stand aside and remains totally silent throughout the entire canto for the first time since line 67 of Canto I.  Here the chela’s authority surpasses the master’s to the same degree that the virtue of humility exceeds the sin of pride.

Dante is looking back and up at his own immediate past, up at the feet of the prideful giant, while his own small feet are blind, and yet blind as they are, and low as they are, they are able, through an unseen guidance, to kick the heads of these sinners locked to their necks in ice.  The poet is moving the reader’s perceptions up to feet and down to heads.  He is moving the reader through the cycle of the seasons too, first through winter, with the ice-bound Danube and Don rivers,  then through spring and summer with the mating croaks of frogs, then through fall with the gleaning peasant girls.  Here are boasting frogs under water, dreaming girls under covers in bed, and the chattering teeth and the clicking beaks of storks flying overhead.  Note too the humble posture of the girls in their dreams, who must bend (as the giant did in conveying the poets here) in order to retrieve the harvest’s final gleanings.  This is just the beginning of the connections that might be made in this canto's incredibly compacted richness of language.  Note the parallel construction of mommy and daddy in verse 9, and that of sheep and goats in verse 15.  Like original sin, our first language infects us with all the mommies' and daddies' world view from the beginning of time to now.  The culture that we inherit through our language, left unexamined, freezes both our spiritual and intellectual development, and locks us into a dog eat dog, self-versus-other world.  By contrast, the language of the Commedia takes us on a tour through the mythical past by its reference to Amphion from Horace and on through to the prophetic future of the Book of Revelations.  A perceptive reader can make many other connections and vastly expand these observations. It is Dante’s greatness that he can so succinctly light up so much time and space, and ignite the brain to experience so many levels of meaning almost simultaneously.

As always Dante tricks out his details in a way that continuously strengthens the weave of his total impression.  For example, the brothers Alberti are seen butting their heads together like sparing rams. This echoes the sheep and goats reference from verse 15, the goats referring to the division of souls at the end times, wherein the obedient sheep are saved, and the wayward goats are damned.  Note too the details of hair and heads, symbols of Samson-like strength and strength of character.   The brothers Alberti butt heads and their hair is entangled, and when the aspirant wishes Bocca to reveal his identity, it is his hair Dante grabs and pulls out — a direct assault on the sinner’s thought and will.  And, finally, the canto ends with the image of Ugolino eating the brain of his earthly tormentor, a parody of communion.

One should also note that in this canto the sinners compound their evil by continuing to be informants against their fellows.  Throughout the Commedia, the damned shades, in spite of their crimes, are still made pliable to the will of the living poet by the promise of fame, and throughout the Inferno, even for the damned, their own names still mesmerize them, and cause them to loosen their tongues with self-serving confessions.  Here, in the final circle of Hell, things are different. The damned do not want their names uttered, and so in keeping with their maliciousness, their fellow inmates inform on them.  We learn from this, like all the other sinners we have seen, that the sinners here have learned nothing from the severity of their punishment, but continue with their betrayals and treasons.

There is a spiritual question posed here that pertains to the whole of the Inferno, which is: Is justice achieved by retribution?  In Dante's version of hell, the sinners are clearly not awakened by the punishments meated out to them.  One could even say that his Hell is a place where punishment is not even about those who are being punished, but about the reaction of witnesses to that punishment.  In brief, if the sinners remain sinners, their very existence remains problematic.  The very idea of justice depends upon righting wrongs.  But here, the pain of the transgressors becomes a lesson for Dante, the aspirant, and for Dante the poet's readers.  To the second Dante, there is no room for pity for those who have earned their pain, and in fact, virtue accrues to those who heap more pain on those who have been the source of pain.  I'm still on the fence about this.  William Blake even goes so far as to claim that the only sin is the sin of vengeance, I suppose his reason being, we all make mistakes, and only forgiveness expunges those errors, not retribution.  Certainly one of the reasons that the sinners suffer so is that they have excluded compassion from their characters, even the compassion that they might have had for their own future selves, who are doomed to suffer from the enormity of the sinners' present actions.  They do not forgive, and in this canto and others, they do not even forgive others accused of the same crime which has condemned them.  And, we might add, that the first step in learning anything is forgiving one's own ignorance.

1  S'ïo avessi le rime aspre e chiocce,
2  come si converrebbe al tristo buco
3  sovra 'l qual pontan tutte l'altre rocce,

1  If I had rhymes both rough and stridulous,
2  As were appropriate to the dismal hole
3  Down upon which thrust all the other rocks,

4  io premerei di mio concetto il suco
5  più pienamente; ma perch' io non l'abbo,
6  non sanza tema a dicer mi conduco;

4  I would press out the juice of my conception
5  More fully; but because I have them not,
6  Not without fear I bring myself to speak;

7  ché non è impresa da pigliare a gabbo
8  discriver fondo a tutto l'universo,
9  né da lingua che chiami mamma o babbo.

7  For 'tis no enterprise to take in jest,
8  To sketch the bottom of all the universe,
9  Nor for a tongue that cries Mamma and Babbo.

10  Ma quelle donne aiutino il mio verso
11  ch'aiutaro Anfïone a chiuder Tebe,
12  sì che dal fatto il dir non sia diverso.

10  But may those Ladies help this verse of mine,
11  Who helped Amphion in enclosing Thebes,
12  That from the fact the word be not diverse.

13  Oh sovra tutte mal creata plebe
14  che stai nel loco onde parlare è duro,
15  mei foste state qui pecore o zebe!

13  O rabble ill-begotten above all,
14  Who're in the place to speak of which is hard,
15  'Twere better ye had here been sheep or goats!

16  Come noi fummo giù nel pozzo scuro
17  sotto i piè del gigante assai più bassi,
18  e io mirava ancora a l'alto muro,

16  When we were down within the darksome well,
17  Beneath the giant's feet, but lower far,
18  And I was scanning still the lofty wall,

19  dicere udi'mi: “Guarda come passi:
20  va sì, che tu non calchi con le piante
21  le teste de' fratei miseri lassi.”

19  I heard it said to me: "Look how thou steppest!
20  Take heed thou do not trample with thy feet
21  The heads of the tired, miserable brothers!"

22  Per ch'io mi volsi, e vidimi davante
23  e sotto i piedi un lago che per gelo
24  avea di vetro e non d'acqua sembiante.

22  Whereat I turned me round, and saw before me
23  And underfoot a lake, that from the frost
24  The semblance had of glass, and not of water.

25  Non fece al corso suo sì grosso velo
26  di verno la Danoia in Osterlicchi,
27  né Tanaï là sotto 'l freddo cielo,

25  So thick a veil ne'er made upon its current
26  In winter-time Danube in Austria,
27  Nor there beneath the frigid sky the Don,

28  com' era quivi; che se Tambernicchi
29  vi fosse sù caduto, o Pietrapana,
30  non avria pur da l'orlo fatto cricchi.

28  As there was here; so that if Tambernich
29  Had fallen upon it, or Pietrapana,
30  E'en at the edge 'twould not have given a creak.

31 E come a gracidar si sta la rana
32  col muso fuor de l'acqua, quando sogna
33  di spigolar sovente la villana,

31  And as to croak the frog doth place himself
32  With muzzle out of water,—when is dreaming
33  Of gleaning oftentimes the peasant-girl,—

34  livide, insin là dove appar vergogna
35  eran l'ombre dolenti ne la ghiaccia,
36  mettendo i denti in nota di cicogna.

34  Livid, as far down as where shame appears,
35  Were the disconsolate shades within the ice,
36  Setting their teeth unto the note of storks.

37  Ognuna in giù tenea volta la faccia;
38  da bocca il freddo, e da li occhi il cor tristo
39  tra lor testimonianza si procaccia.

37  Each one his countenance held downward bent;
38  From mouth the cold, from eyes the doleful heart
39  Among them witness of itself procures.

40  Quand' io m'ebbi dintorno alquanto visto,
41  volsimi a' piedi, e vidi due sì stretti,
42  che 'l pel del capo avieno insieme misto.

40  When round about me somewhat I had looked,
41  I downward turned me, and saw two so close,
42  The hair upon their heads together mingled.

43  “Ditemi, voi che sì strignete i petti,”
44  diss' io, “chi siete?” E quei piegaro i colli;
45  e poi ch'ebber li visi a me eretti,

43"Ye who so strain your breasts together, tell me,"
44  I said, "who are you;" and they bent their necks,
45  And when to me their faces they had lifted,

46  li occhi lor, ch'eran pria pur dentro molli,
47  gocciar su per le labbra, e 'l gelo strinse
48  le lagrime tra essi e riserrolli.

46  Their eyes, which first were only moist within,
47  Gushed o'er the eyelids, and the frost congealed
48  The tears between, and locked them up again.

49  Con legno legno spranga mai non cinse
50  forte così; ond' ei come due becchi
51  cozzaro insieme, tanta ira li vinse.

49  Clamp never bound together wood with wood
50  So strongly; whereat they, like two he-goats,
51  Butted together, so much wrath o'ercame them.

52  E un ch'avea perduti ambo li orecchi
53  per la freddura, pur col viso in giùe,
54  disse: “Perché cotanto in noi ti specchi?

52  And one, who had by reason of the cold
53  Lost both his ears, still with his visage downward,
54  Said: "Why dost thou so mirror thyself in us?

55  Se vuoi saper chi son cotesti due,
56  la valle onde Bisenzo si dichina
57  del padre loro Alberto e di lor fue.

55  If thou desire to know who these two are,
56  The valley whence Bisenzio descends
57  Belonged to them and to their father Albert.

58  D'un corpo usciro; e tutta la Caina
59  potrai cercare, e non troverai ombra
60  degna più d'esser fitta in gelatina:

58  They from one body came, and all Caina
59  Thou shalt search through, and shalt not find a shade
60   More worthy to be fixed in gelatine;

61  non quelli a cui fu rotto il petto e l'ombra
62  con esso un colpo per la man d'Artù;
63  non Focaccia; non questi che m'ingombra

61  Not he in whom were broken breast and shadow
62  At one and the same blow by Arthur's hand;
63  Focaccia not; not he who me encumbers

64  col capo sì, ch'i' non veggio oltre più,
65  e fu nomato Sassol Mascheroni;
66   se tosco se', ben sai omai chi fu.

64  So with his head I see no farther forward,
65  And bore the name of Sassol Mascheroni;
66  Well knowest thou who he was, if thou art Tuscan.

67  E perché non mi metti in più sermoni,
68  sappi ch'i' fu' il Camiscion de' Pazzi;
69  e aspetto Carlin che mi scagioni.”

67  And that thou put me not to further speech,
68  Know that I Camicion de' Pazzi was,
69  And wait Carlino to exonerate me."

70  Poscia vid' io mille visi cagnazzi
71  fatti per freddo; onde mi vien riprezzo,
72  e verrà sempre, de' gelati guazzi.

70  Then I beheld a thousand faces, made
71  Purple with cold; whence o'er me comes a shudder,
72  And evermore will come, at frozen ponds.

73  E mentre ch'andavamo inver' lo mezzo
74  al quale ogne gravezza si rauna,
75  e io tremava ne l'etterno rezzo;

73  And while we were advancing tow'rds the middle,
74  Where everything of weight unites together,
75  And I was shivering in the eternal shade,

76  se voler fu o destino o fortuna,
77  non so; ma, passeggiando tra le teste,
78  forte percossi 'l piè nel viso ad una.
76  Whether 'twere will, or destiny, or chance,
77  I know not; but in walking 'mong the heads
78  I struck my foot hard in the face of one.

79  Piangendo mi sgridò: “Perché mi peste?
80  se tu non vieni a crescer la vendetta
82  di Montaperti, perché mi moleste?”

79  Weeping he growled: "Why dost thou trample me?
80  Unless thou comest to increase the vengeance
81  of Montaperti, why dost thou molest me?"

82  E io: “Maestro mio, or qui m'aspetta,
83  sì ch'io esca d'un dubbio per costui;
84  poi mi farai, quantunque vorrai, fretta.”

82  And I: "My Master, now wait here for me,
83 That I through him may issue from a doubt;
84  Then thou mayst hurry me, as thou shalt wish."

85  Lo duca stette, e io dissi a colui
86  che bestemmiava duramente ancora:
87  “Qual se' tu che così rampogni altrui?”

85  The Leader stopped; and to that one I said
86  Who was blaspheming vehemently still:
87  "Who art thou, that thus reprehendest others?"

88  “Or tu chi se' che vai per l'Antenora,
89  percotendo,” rispuose, “altrui le gote,
90  sì che, se fossi vivo, troppo fora?”

88  "Now who art thou, that goest through Antenora
89  Smiting," replied he, "other people's cheeks,
90  So that, if thou wert living, 'twere too much?"

91  “Vivo son io, e caro esser ti puote,”
92  fu mia risposta, “se dimandi fama,
93  ch'io metta il nome tuo tra l'altre note.”

91  "Living I am, and dear to thee it may be,"
92  Was my response, "if thou demandest fame,
93  That 'mid the other notes thy name I place."

94  Ed elli a me: “Del contrario ho io brama.
95  Lèvati quinci e non mi dar più lagna,
96  ché mal sai lusingar per questa lama!”

94  And he to me: "For the reverse I long;
95  Take thyself hence, and give me no more trouble;
96  For ill thou knowest to flatter in this hollow."

97  Allor lo presi per la cuticagna
98  e dissi: “El converrà che tu ti nomi,
99  o che capel qui sù non ti rimagna.”

97  Then by the scalp behind I seized upon him,
98  And said: "It must needs be thou name thyself,
99  Or not a hair remain upon thee here."

100  Ond' elli a me: “Perché tu mi dischiomi,
101  né ti dirò ch'io sia, né mosterrolti
102  se mille fiate in sul capo mi tomi.”

100  Whence he to me: "Though thou strip off my hair,
101  I will not tell thee who I am, nor show thee,
102  If on my head a thousand times thou fall."

103  Io avea già i capelli in mano avvolti,
104  e tratti glien' avea più d'una ciocca,
105  latrando lui con li occhi in giù raccolti,

103  I had his hair in hand already twisted,
104  And more than one shock of it had pulled out,
105  He barking, with his eyes held firmly down,

106  quando un altro gridò: “Che hai tu, Bocca?
107  non ti basta sonar con le mascelle,
108  se tu non latri? qual diavol ti tocca?”

106  When cried another: "What doth ail thee, Bocca?
107  Is't not enough to clatter with thy jaws,
108  But thou must bark? what devil touches thee?"

109  “Omai,” diss' io, “non vo' che più favelle,
110  malvagio traditor; ch'a la tua onta
111  io porterò di te vere novelle.”
109  "Now," said I, "I care not to have thee speak,
110  Accursed traitor; for unto thy shame
111  I will report of thee veracious news."

112  “Va via,” rispuose, “e ciò che tu vuoi conta;
113  ma non tacer, se tu di qua entro eschi,
114  di quel ch'ebbe or così la lingua pronta.

112  "Begone," replied he, "and tell what thou wilt,
113  But be not silent, if thou issue hence,
114  Of him who had just now his tongue so prompt;

115  El piange qui l'argento de' Franceschi:
116  'Io vidi,' potrai dir, 'quel da Duera
117  là dove i peccatori stanno freschi.'

115  He weepeth here the silver of the French;
116  'I saw,' thus canst thou phrase it, 'him of Duera
117  There where the sinners stand out in the cold.'

118  Se fossi domandato 'Altri chi v'era?'
119  tu hai dallato quel di Beccheria
120  di cui segò Fiorenza la gorgiera.

118  If thou shouldst questioned be who else was there,
119  Thou hast beside thee him of Beccaria,
120  Of whom the gorget Florence slit asunder;

121  Gianni de' Soldanier credo che sia
122  più là con Ganellone e Tebaldello,
123  ch'aprì Faenza quando si dormia.”

121  Gianni del Soldanier, I think, may be
122  Yonder with Ganellon, and Tebaldello
123  Who oped Faenza when the people slep."

124  Noi eravam partiti già da ello,
125  ch'io vidi due ghiacciati in una buca,
126  sì che l'un capo a l'altro era cappello;

124  Already we had gone away from him,
125  When I beheld two frozen in one hole,
126  So that one head a hood was to the other;

127  e come 'l pan per fame si manduca,
128  così 'l sovran li denti a l'altro pose
129  là 've 'l cervel s'aggiugne con la nuca:

127  And even as bread through hunger is devoured,
128  The uppermost on the other set his teeth,
129  There where the brain is to the nape united.

130  non altrimenti Tidëo si rose
131  le tempie a Menalippo per disdegno,
132  che quei faceva il teschio e l'altre cose.

130  Not in another fashion Tydeus gnawed
131  The temples of Menalippus in disdain,
132  Than that one did the skull and the other things.

133  “O tu che mostri per sì bestial segno
134  odio sovra colui che tu ti mangi,
135  dimmi 'l perché,” diss' io, “per tal convegno,

133  "O thou, who showest by such bestial sign
134  Thy hatred against him whom thou art eating,
135  Tell me the wherefore," said I, "with this compact,

136  che se tu a ragion di lui ti piangi,
137  sappiendo chi voi siete e la sua pecca,
138  nel mondo suso ancora io te ne cangi,

136  That if thou rightfully of him complain,
137  In knowing who ye are, and his transgression,
138  I in the world above repay thee for it,

139  se quella con ch'io parlo non si secca.”

140  If that wherewith I speak be not dried up."

Canto XXXIII
Canto XXXIII of the Inferno is a propounding of multiple horrors, so atrocious, so repulsive and so grotesque that their very existence, especially as presented here as a sort of imperishable Akasic memory of God's response to sin, challenges, for me at least, the whole idea of retributive punishment.  In the first few lines — the image of Ugolino's head gnawing on the nape and brains of Archbishop Ruggieri — we already have the classic three positions: Victim, Victimizer, Witness.  Inside the poem the witness is the aspirant, Dante, but there are other witnesses too, the readers, us ... just how exactly are we to react to this kind of grotesque image of eternal punishment?  Is such evil archetypal in the Jungian psychological sense?  The second word of the canto is bocca, mouth, and when I read this, I thought of a concept that I marked years ago in a book on Alchemy (Alchemy: The Medieval Alchemists and their Royal Art; Johannes Fabricius, pg. 57).  In this book there is a caption for an image which reads: "The 'oral triad' of alchemy: the wish to eat, to be eaten, and to sleep."  And this passage seems apropos to what is happening here.  The wish to eat, the wish to sleep, it takes no great introspection to comprehend those desires ... but the wish to be eaten?  Isn't that the idea of the Eucharist?  The believer eats the body of Christ, so does that mean that the wish to be eaten would be an Imitation of Christ?  When one of Ugolino's sons tells him (lines 61-63) that they (the sons) would suffer less if he would feed on them, we have presented here the wish to be eaten, but presented here in such bizarre and repulsive circumstances that we could hardly suppose such a desire to part of normal human consciousness.  Is it?  This whole canto makes a point of showing instances when hosts invited their enemies to a banquet, and then murdered them: and we need only remember that the wafer which symbolizes Christ's body is called the "host", and we see here another parody in Hell, where salvation's rituals are infernally perverted.  All kinds of things swim into consciousness as we remember such things as Christ's words in Mathew 15:18: "And he called the multitude, and said unto them, Hear, and understand: Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man; but that which cometh out of the mouth, this defileth a man."  Ugolino's words defile him, but his silence does too, when his stoicism, or stunned grief, or false sense of pride, keeps him from offering comfort to his sons.  And we should not forget the text's use of that third desire: sleep, which is in this canto a harbinger of the true horror of the Ugolino clan's predicament.  Note too the maleness of this whole scene.  One would think food/mother would be an indivisible bond, but the food here is not mother's milk, it is murderous deceit, the deceit perhaps of incarnation, wherein, as a Zen saying goes, We eat to survive to be hungry.  Another way to look at this is that we share even with our worst enemies a terrible rapport formed by this oral triad.

What rapport is that?  And between whom?  Between Dante, the aspirant, Francesca (in Canto 5), and Ugolino here.  Note how lines 4 -6 in this canto echo lines 4 - 6 in Canto I.  In both, speaking recalls terrible emotions, respectively grief and fear.  In both the speaker consents to speak in spite of this.  But Ugolino wishes to speak because he desires to bring more ignominy to his enemy, while aspirant wishes to speak so that what he says might do some good to others.  The other image that links this canto with earlier ones with this one is the image of the hounds pursuing a wolf and whelps on the mountain, and this flashes us to the she-wolf who confronts the aspirant as he tries to climb the mountain, and also the mysterious lines allegorically comparing a political savior to a greyhound perusing a wolf.  (The canine imagery provides a lot of "food" for thought.  Dogs eat their own vomit, and also the feces of their pups, what then are the consumers of the communion of the Divine Comedy's text supposed to be eating here?).   Both Ugolino and Francesca say that they're speaking will be combined with weeping, and both plead for Dante's sympathy.  But in this case, the aspirant shows us the difference, since in the case of Francesca he feels sympathy (and is rebuked for it), yet in the case Ugolino, the aspirant breaks into a tirade which can only be interpreted as a case for mass murder of all the Pisans.  He imagines damming the Arno and drowning them all.  Are we supposed to think here or God's righteous anger when he destroyed the world by flood, or when he destroyed the population of Sodom and Gomorra?  The aspirant also lies and further torments other sinners in this canto.  He becomes more than a witness, his blood is up, and he lashes out physically ... and so we come to the issue of The Witness.  In these three cases, there are witnesses.  Not unusual, because there are always witnesses.  As readers, we are witnesses.  So?  So, how should a witness respond to this archetype of victim and victimizer?  In Canto I, it is the Virgin Mary (sending her surrogate St. Lucy, who informs Beatrice) who is witness to Dante's waywardness.  In Canto V and here in Canto XXXIII, it is Dante, the aspirant, who is witness.  What are we to make of all these connections and contrasts (only a sampling here, a good reader could no doubt find more)?  We could think of these relationships as constellations of figures who arrange themselves around a moral issue.  I think by presenting all these possibilities here that the poet, Dante, wants to leave the question of the placements of these figures, and even an absolute definition of what moral issue is at stake, to be answered in the minds and hearts of his readers.  It's not as if these questions can ever be answered, but contemplating them seems to me to wonderfully proliferating of insights, not only into Dante, but into the possibility of achieve a spiritual transcendence.   

We see for example a weird parody of Christ's "the stones would cry out" rebuke on Palm Sunday, to Ugolino's statement he turned to stone and would not cry out to comfort his dying sons.  And in line 150 we find the scattering of the Genovese (wonderful rhyming of diversi and spersi), like the scattering of people and their languages at the fall of the tower of Babble.  I find it fascinating that Dante the writer, as the shades in hell become more and more immobilized, literally frozen their agony, has not painted himself into a box at all, but continues to enrich his text, with all these culminations and connections.  We could also talk about the cumulative portrayals of Time throughout the cantos: Why do some of the dead know the future or the fates of people distant from them in time?  I think you could think of the souls already bilocating in Hell while their bodies remain as shells on earth, shells inhabited by devils, as entities split and scattered not only in different places (above, on earth; below, in hell), but also in time (dead before they are dead, and alive after they are dead).  These possessions of the body's shell, reminded me of the Qliphot in the Kabbala, which at least one author (Mark Jay Mirsky, Dante, Eros, & Kabbalah) claims Dante knew.

Last note: I'm struggling with overwhelm reading this text, so many great and crucial things revealed, but it's so hard to assimilate them.  I feel swept away, drowning.    

1  La bocca sollevò dal fiero pasto
2  quel peccator, forbendola a' capelli
3  del capo ch'elli avea di retro guasto.

1  His mouth uplifted from his grim repast,
2  That sinner, wiping it upon the hair
3  Of the same head that he behind had wasted.

4  Poi cominciò: “Tu vuo' ch'io rinovelli
5  disperato dolor che 'l cor mi preme
6  già pur pensando, pria ch'io ne favelli.

4  Then he began: "Thou wilt that I renew
5  The desperate grief, which wrings my heart already
6  To think of only, ere I speak of it;

7  Ma se le mie parole esser dien seme
8  che frutti infamia al traditor ch'i' rodo,
9  parlare e lagrimar vedrai insieme.

7  But if my words be seed that may bear fruit
8  Of infamy to the traitor whom I gnaw,
9  Speaking and weeping shalt thou see together.

10  Io non so chi tu se' né per che modo
11  venuto se' qua giù; ma fiorentino
12  mi sembri veramente quand' io t'odo.

10  I know not who thou art, nor by what mode
11  Thou hast come down here; but a Florentine
12  Thou seemest to me truly, when I hear thee.

13  Tu dei saper ch'i' fui conte Ugolino,
14  e questi è l'arcivescovo Ruggieri:
15  or ti dirò perché i son tal vicino.

13  Thou hast to know I was Count Ugolino,
14  And this one was Ruggieri the Archbishop;
15  Now I will tell thee why I am such a neighbour.

16  Che per l'effetto de' suo' mai pensieri,
17  fidandomi di lui, io fossi preso
18  e poscia morto, dir non è mestieri;

16  That, by effect of his malicious thoughts,
17  Trusting in him I was made prisoner,
18  And after put to death, I need not say;

19  però quel che non puoi avere inteso,
20  cioè come la morte mia fu cruda,
21  udirai, e saprai s'e' m'ha offeso.

19  But ne'ertheless what thou canst not have heard,
20  That is to say, how cruel was my death,
21  Hear shalt thou, and shalt know if he has wronged me.

22  Breve pertugio dentro da la Muda,
23  la qual per me ha 'l titol de la fame,
24  e che conviene ancor ch'altrui si chiuda,

22  A narrow perforation in the mew,
23  Which bears because of me the title of Famine,
24  And in which others still must be locked up,

25  m'avea mostrato per lo suo forame
26  più lune già, quand' io feci 'l mal sonno
27  che del futuro mi squarciò 'l velame.

25  Had shown me through its opening many moons
26  Already, when I dreamed the evil dream
27  Which of the future rent for me the veil.

28  Questi pareva a me maestro e donno,
29  cacciando il lupo e ' lupicini al monte
30  per che i Pisan veder Lucca non ponno.

28  This one appeared to me as lord and master,
29  Hunting the wolf and whelps upon the mountain
30  For which the Pisans cannot Lucca see.

31  Con cagne magre, studïose e conte
32  Gualandi con Sismondi e con Lanfranchi
33  s'avea messi dinanzi da la fronte.

31  With sleuth-hounds gaunt, and eager, and well trained,
32  Gualandi with Sismondi and Lanfianchi
33  He had sent out before him to the front.

34  In picciol corso mi parieno stanchi
35  lo padre e ' figli, e con l'agute scane
36  mi parea lor veder fender li fianchi.

34  After brief course seemed unto me forespent
35  The father and the sons, and with sharp tushes
36  It seemed to me I saw their flanks ripped open.

37  Quando fui desto innanzi la dimane,
38  pianger senti' fra 'l sonno i miei figliuoli
39  ch'eran con meco, e dimandar del pane.

37  When I before the morrow was awake,
38  Moaning amid their sleep I heard my sons
39  Who with me were, and asking after bread.

40  Ben se' crudel, se tu già non ti duoli
41  pensando ciò che 'l mio cor s'annunziava;
42  e se non piangi, di che pianger suoli?

40  Cruel indeed art thou, if yet thou grieve not,
41  Thinking of what my heart foreboded me,
42  And weep'st thou not, what art thou wont to weep at?

43  Già eran desti, e l'ora s'appressava
44  che 'l cibo ne solëa essere addotto,
45  e per suo sogno ciascun dubitava;

43  They were awake now, and the hour drew nigh
44  At which our food used to be brought to us,
45  And through his dream was each one apprehensive;

46  e io senti' chiavar l'uscio di sotto
47  a l'orribile torre; ond' io guardai
48  nel viso a' mie' figliuoi sanza far motto.

46  And I heard locking up the under door
47  Of the horrible tower; whereat without a word
48  I gazed into the faces of my sons.

49  Io non piangëa, sì dentro impetrai:
50  piangevan elli; e Anselmuccio mio
51  disse: 'Tu guardi sì, padre! che hai?'

49  I wept not, I within so turned to stone;
50  They wept; and darling little Anselm mine
51  Said: 'Thou dost gaze so, father, what doth ail thee?'

52  Perciò non lagrimai né rispuos' io
53  tutto quel giorno né la notte appresso,
54  infin che l'altro sol nel mondo uscìo.

52  Still not a tear I shed, nor answer made
53  All of that day, nor yet the night thereafter,
54  Until another sun rose on the world.

55  Come un poco di raggio si fu messo
56  nel doloroso carcere, e io scorsi
57  per quattro visi il mio aspetto stesso,

55  As now a little glimmer made its way
56  Into the dolorous prison, and I saw
57  Upon four faces my own very aspect,

58  ambo le man per lo dolor mi morsi;
59  ed ei, pensando ch'io 'l fessi per voglia
60  di manicar, di sùbito levorsi

58  Both of my hands in agony I bit;
59  And, thinking that I did it from desire
60  Of eating, on a sudden they uprose,

61  e disser: 'Padre, assai ci fia men doglia
62  se tu mangi di noi: tu ne vestisti
63  queste misere carni, e tu le spoglia.'

61  And said they: 'Father, much less pain 'twill give us
62  If thou do eat of us; thyself didst clothe us
63  With this poor flesh, and do thou strip it off.'

64  Queta'mi allor per non farli più tristi;
65  lo dì e l'altro stemmo tutti muti;
66  ahi dura terra, perché non t'apristi?

64  I calmed me then, not to make them more sad.
65  That day we all were silent, and the next.
66  Ah! obdurate earth, wherefore didst thou not open?

67  Poscia che fummo al quarto dì venuti,
68  Gaddo mi si gittò disteso a' piedi,
69  dicendo: 'Padre mio, che non m'aiuti?'

67  When we had come unto the fourth day, Gaddo
68  Threw himself down outstretched before my feet,
69  Saying, 'My father, why dost thou not help me?'

70  Quivi morì; e come tu mi vedi,
71  vid' io cascar li tre ad uno ad uno
72  tra 'l quinto dì e 'l sesto; ond' io mi diedi,

70  And there he died; and, as thou seest me,
71  I saw the three fall, one by one, between
72  The fifth day and the sixth; whence I betook me,

73  già cieco, a brancolar sovra ciascuno,
74  e due dì li chiamai, poi che fur morti.
75  Poscia, più che 'l dolor, poté 'l digiuno.”

73  Already blind, to groping over each,
74  And three days called them after they were dead;
75  Then hunger did what sorrow could not do."

76  Quand' ebbe detto ciò, con li occhi torti
77  riprese 'l teschio misero co' denti,
78  che furo a l'osso, come d'un can, forti.

76  When he had said this, with his eyes distorted,
77  The wretched skull resumed he with his teeth,
78  Which, as a dog's, upon the bone were strong.

79  Ahi Pisa, vituperio de le genti
80  del bel paese là dove 'l sì suona,
81  poi che i vicini a te punir son lenti,

79  Ah! Pisa, thou opprobrium of the people
80  Of the fair land there where the 'Si' doth sound,
81  Since slow to punish thee thy neighbours are,

82  muovasi la Capraia e la Gorgona,
83  e faccian siepe ad Arno in su la foce,
84  sì ch'elli annieghi in te ogne persona!

82  Let the Capraia and Gorgona move,
83  And make a hedge across the mouth of Arno
84  That every person in thee it may drown!

85  Che se 'l conte Ugolino aveva voce
86  d'aver tradita te de le castella,
87  non dovei tu i figliuoi porre a tal croce.

85  For if Count Ugolino had the fame
86  Of having in thy castles thee betrayed,
87  Thou shouldst not on such cross have put his sons.

88  Innocenti facea l'età novella,
89  novella Tebe, Uguiccione e 'l Brigata
90  e li altri due che 'l canto suso appella.

88  Guiltless of any crime, thou modern Thebes!
89  Their youth made Uguccione and Brigata,
90  And the other two my song doth name above!

91  Noi passammo oltre, là 've la gelata
92  ruvidamente un'altra gente fascia,
93  non volta in giù, ma tutta riversata.

91  We passed still farther onward, where the ice
92  Another people ruggedly enswathes,
93  Not downward turned, but all of them reversed.

94  Lo pianto stesso lì pianger non lascia,
95  e 'l duol che truova in su li occhi rintoppo,
96  si volge in entro a far crescer l'ambascia;

94  Weeping itself there does not let them weep,
95  And grief that finds a barrier in the eyes
96  Turns itself inward to increase the anguish;

97  ché le lagrime prime fanno groppo,
98  e sì come visiere di cristallo,
99  rïempion sotto 'l ciglio tutto il coppo.

97  Because the earliest tears a cluster form,
98  And, in the manner of a crystal visor,
99  Fill all the cup beneath the eyebrow full.

100  E avvegna che, sì come d'un callo,
101  per la freddura ciascun sentimento
102  cessato avesse del mio viso stallo,

100  And notwithstanding that, as in a callus,
101  Because of cold all sensibility
102  Its station had abandoned in my face,

103  già mi parea sentire alquanto vento;
104  per ch'io: “Maestro mio, questo chi move?
105  non è qua giù ogne vapore spento?”

103  Still it appeared to me I felt some wind;
104  Whence I: "My Master, who sets this in motion?
105  Is not below here every vapour quenched?"

106  Ond' elli a me: “Avaccio sarai dove
107  di ciò ti farà l'occhio la risposta,
108  veggendo la cagion che 'l fiato piove.”

106  Whence he to me: "Full soon shalt thou be where
107  Thine eye shall answer make to thee of this,
108  Seeing the cause which raineth down the blast."

109  E un de' tristi de la fredda crosta
110  gridò a noi: “O anime crudeli
111  tanto che data v'è l'ultima posta,

109  And one of the wretches of the frozen crust
110  Cried out to us: "O souls so merciless
111  That the last post is given unto you,

112  levatemi dal viso i duri veli,
113  sì ch'ïo sfoghi 'l duol che 'l cor m'impregna,
114  un poco, pria che 'l pianto si raggeli.”

112  Lift from mine eyes the rigid veils, that I
113  May vent the sorrow which impregns my heart
114  A little, e'er the weeping recongeal."

115  Per ch'io a lui: “Se vuo' ch'i' ti sovvegna,
116  dimmi chi se', e s'io non ti disbrigo,
117  al fondo de la ghiaccia ir mi convegna.”

115  Whence I to him: "If thou wouldst have me help thee
116  Say who thou wast; and if I free thee not,
117  May I go to the bottom of the ice."

118  Rispuose adunque: “I' son frate Alberigo;
119  i' son quel da le frutta del mal orto,
120  che qui riprendo dattero per figo.”

118  Then he replied: "I am Friar Alberigo;
119  He am I of the fruit of the bad garden,
120  Who here a date am getting for my fig."

121  “Oh,” diss' io lui, “or se' tu ancor morto?”
122  Ed elli a me: “Come 'l mio corpo stea
123  nel mondo sù, nulla scïenza porto.

121  "O," said I to him, "now art thou, too, dead?"
122  And he to me: "How may my body fare
123  Up in the world, no knowledge I possess.

124  Cotal vantaggio ha questa Tolomea,
125  che spesse volte l'anima ci cade
126  innanzi ch'Atropòs mossa le dea.

124  Such an advantage has this Ptolomaea,
125  That oftentimes the soul descendeth here
126  Sooner than Atropos in motion sets it.

124  E perché tu più volontier mi rade
125  le 'nvetrïate lagrime dal volto,
126  sappie che, tosto che l'anima trade

127  And, that thou mayest more willingly remove
128  From off my countenance these glassy tears,
129  Know that as soon as any soul betrays

130  com fec' ïo, il corpo suo l'è tolto
131  da un demonio, che poscia il governa
132  mentre che 'l tempo suo tutto sia vòlto.

130  As I have done, his body by a demon
131  Is taken from him, who thereafter rules it,
132  Until his time has wholly been revolved.

133  Ella ruina in sì fatta cisterna;
134  e forse pare ancor lo corpo suso
135  de l'ombra che di qua dietro mi verna.

133  Itself down rushes into such a cistern;
134  And still perchance above appears the body
135  Of yonder shade, that winters here behind me.

136  Tu 'l dei saper, se tu vien pur mo giuso;
137  elli è ser Branca Doria, e son più anni
138  poscia passati ch'el fu sì racchiuso.”

136  This thou shouldst know, if thou hast just come down;
137  It is Ser Branca d' Oria, and many years
138  Have passed away since he was thus locked up."

139  “Io credo,” diss' io lui, “che tu m'inganni;
140  ché Branca Doria non morì unquanche,
141  e mangia e bee e dorme e veste panni.”

139  "I think," said I to him, "thou dost deceive me;
140  For Branca d' Oria is not dead as yet,
141  And eats, and drinks, and sleeps, and puts on clothes."

142  “Nel fosso sù,” diss' el, “de' Malebranche,
143  là dove bolle la tenace pece,
144  non era ancora giunto Michel Zanche,

142  "In moat above," said he, "of Malebranche,
143  There where is boiling the tenacious pitch,
144  As yet had Michel Zanche not arrived,

145  che questi lasciò il diavolo in sua vece
146  nel corpo suo, ed un suo prossimano
147  che 'l tradimento insieme con lui fece.

145  When this one left a devil in his stead
146  In his own body and one near of kin,
147  Who made together with him the betrayal.

148  Ma distendi oggimai in qua la mano;
149  aprimi li occhi.” E io non gliel' apersi;
150  e cortesia fu lui esser villano.

148  But hitherward stretch out thy hand forthwith,
149  Open mine eyes;"—and open them I did not,
150  And to be rude to him was courtesy.

151  Ahi Genovesi, uomini diversi
152  d'ogne costume e pien d'ogne magagna,
153  perché non siete voi del mondo spersi?

151  Ah, Genoese! ye men at variance
152  With every virtue, full of every vice
153  Wherefore are ye not scattered from the world?

154  Ché col peggiore spirto di Romagna
155  trovai di voi un tal, che per sua opra
156  in anima in Cocito già si bagna,

154  For with the vilest spirit of Romagna
155  I found of you one such, who for his deeds
156 In soul already in Cocytus bathes,

157  e in corpo par vivo ancor di sopra.

157  And still above in body seems alive!

Canto XXXIV
In every Individual Man, and the limit of Opakeness,             
Is named Satan: and the limit of Contraction is named Adam.

William Blake

Well here we are, the last canto of the Inferno, and what an incredibly eerie place this is.  Here the source of all the evil in the world is portrayed, not in the Robert Lewis Stevenson sense of an alacritous life-loving Mr. Hyde-like force, but as something silent, frozen, impenetrable.  I wanted to say immovable, and that is true, in the sense of any movement animated by an internal or volitional sense of self, but Satan in this canto is depicted as more machine than being.  Dante makes this clear in line by comparing his motion of his wings to that of a windmill, a kind of gigantic piece of stage machinery, a gadget fueled my its own suffering, as it the angel which he once was was consumed by his own sense of egoistic pride.  If you are a serious, committed reader of Dante, when you get here, you may very well feel a paralysis of will, and a paralysis of insight, because here is the place where progressive time has stopped, and we are reminded of that notion that the fall of Satan was the first event to occur in time.  If we have seen in Canto XXXIII in the figure of Ugolino the misuse of the mouth as a source of cannibalism and deceptive speech, the last active apotheosis of evil, here we see evil's culmination: an artic waste whose wind is not the breath of spirit, but a merely mechanical whirring of wings ("Sails", with the duel meaning of a boat's sail and also of wings, since in falconry, the hawk's wings are also called sails.).  Satan here is can hardly be given the name entity, he has been reduced to the condition of a contrivance.  The description made me think of Descartes' view of animals as mere instinct machines without souls.  In which case, this evil-machine is like one of the cats in the famous cat clavier, which, when a key is depressed, it causes a creature to yowl.  Does this mean that God has offloaded the evil in His creation to one who has forfeited creature status (Dante calls Satan La creatura, in his former state as a light-giver, i.e. Lucifer, line 18) and is now a mere puppet, a kind of reversal of the path of Pinocchio, who through his nefarious misuse of freedom, has imprisoned himself forever as the mechanism of cause and effect, as cause, the source of suffering, as effect, it's ultimate depository.   The fact that we have inherited this view of the body and universe as mechanism (allopathic medical science operating precisely from this position), shows us just how pernicious such a condition is.  We ourselves have surrendered our beingness, our souls, to become a series of interlocking gears, driven by causes and subject to effects that operate automatically as the so-called Laws of Nature.  That is the materialist position, and when entities accept such a position as truth, they accept with it the unending despair of a true loss of subjectivity, all of its concerns for love, for freedom, for the warmth of family or friendship, for empathy, for meaning itself, become but links in a chain that bind us forever to the condition of a machine accidently assembled in the endless machinations of that old bugaboo: Time.  When the aspirant, Dante, in the poem confronts this condition he is so numbed by terror that he, like Satan himself, is speechless, and just as he was in Canto One of the Inferno, suspended in a state of unconsciousness scarcely to be distinguished from death, so here too, he enter a kind of in-between Bardo, described thusly in the following lines:

22  Com' io divenni allor gelato e fioco,
23  nol dimandar, lettor, ch'i' non lo scrivo,
24  però ch'ogne parlar sarebbe poco.

22  How frozen I became and powerless then,
23  Ask it not, Reader, for I write it not,
24  Because all language would be insufficient.

25  Io non mori' e non rimasi vivo;
26  pensa oggimai per te, s'hai fior d'ingegno,
27  qual io divenni, d'uno e d'altro privo.

25  I did not die, and I alive remained not;
26  Think for thyself now, hast thou aught of wit,
27  What I became, being of both deprived.

In brief, the condition of the sinners here, frozen in various attitudes, and fixed like figures embedded in glass (think of those heaps of corpses from the Nazi death camps, but here all higgledy-piggledy become preserved in the attitudes of their demise and fall), has become aspirant's condition.  The aspirant has now reached the very nadir of being, the last condition possible for an entity, before passing over into the utter waste of a landfill of broken machinery.

A note here about the Threeness, in the three heads/mouths/colors of Satan.  Certainly we are remined of the trinity, but also Cerberus whom we met in Canto VI, another conglomerate being with three heads, who, with his vermillion eyes and black beard (two of the three colors mentioned here) tears sinners with his mouth.  I think a contemporary reader, here, and throughout the Commedia, can easily substitute other historical figures for the Judas, Brutus, and Cassius-like figures depicted by Dante.  Anyone who subverts the health of all for his or her own personal desires can serve.  We have our own Stalins and Hitlers and Pol Pots, our own purveyors of genocide who are more of a match for the perfidy displayed by Dante's sinners.  But to return to subject of colors, in this case the vermillion (not red, or rosso), black, and a color between white and yellow.  A lot of speculation as to the symbology of these three colors has accrued over the centuries.  My own take on it is not symbolic at all, but physiological.  These I believe are the colors that the fetus in the womb experiences as light comes through the tissues of the mother's body.  Thus, for me, these colors represent the precursors of incarnation, the source of all our woes until a Christ-like realization of our matter's own divinity occurs.  These colors are like that processional of banners in the first verses of this canto, and their procession marches through time from birth to death, the first state inevitably producing the second, and moment when Dante and Virgil squeeze through that tiny opening to eventually emerge into the light of Purgatory (purgation/spiritual progress, or just the simple ability to learn, and thus change) is analogous to our passage through the birth canal.  But in this case we are being born, not into a mortal body, but into an eternal body, a body entirely comprised of spirit.  The reader should also note that time and space also change when we are reborn as spirit.  Jung has the concept of enantiodromia, a sudden psychic reversal, wherein an emotion becomes so strong that it flips to its opposite, as say, when a couple's passion for one another turns from love to hate.  Only here, the reverse is true, a universe of fear, hate, destructiveness, egotistical hooliganism, and monstrous ugliness, opens to the possibility of peace, love, creativity, compassion, and beauty.  The poem announces this just as God announced the birth of Jesus, with the vision of stars.  (The word star or stars being the last word in all three Canticles of the poem.)  And we should also note that just as Satan is speechless here, so too the aspirant at the end of the Paradiso ascends to a glory of ineffability.    

A final note on the subject of cause and effect.  There has been a lot of debate about how Virgil, an insubstantial shade, can at times be seen as substanceless, and at other times, as here, when he shields the aspirant from the freezing gales of hell, and when he carries the embodied Dante up the shank of Satan, he appears to have a material body.  There are many inconsistencies like this throughout the Commedia.  Some commentators simply assume that this is poetic licence, and in a sense it is.  But only in the sense that the creative self (and a creature in the Creator's image must in essence be nothing but a source of creativity) makes the rules, and remakes them.  That is to say, we have left the realm of mechanical cause and effect, and entered the realm of creative miracle.  For the true creator, the true artist, cause and effect is just another tool in the toolbox to make things new or stable or unstable as the spirit moves her or him.    

1  “Vexilla regis prodeunt inferni
2  verso di noi; però dinanzi mira,”
3  disse 'l maestro mio, “se tu 'l discerni.”

1  "'Vexilla Regis prodeunt Inferni'
2  Towards us; therefore look in front of thee,"
3  My Master said, "if thou discernest him."

4  Come quando una grossa nebbia spira,
5  o quando l'emisperio nostro annotta,
6  par di lungi un molin che 'l vento gira,

4  As, when there breathes a heavy fog, or when
5  Our hemisphere is darkening into night,
6  Appears far off a mill the wind is turning,

7  veder mi parve un tal dificio allotta;
8  poi per lo vento mi ristrinsi retro
9  al duca mio, ché non li era altra grotta.

7  Methought that such a building then I saw;
8  And, for the wind, I drew myself behind
9  My Guide, because there was no other shelter.

10  Già era, e con paura il metto in metro,
11  là dove l'ombre tutte eran coperte,
12  e trasparien come festuca in vetro.

10  Now was I, and with fear in verse I put it,
11  There where the shades were wholly covered up,
12  And glimmered through like unto straws in glass.

13  Altre sono a giacere; altre stanno erte,
14  quella col capo e quella con le piante;
15  altra, com' arco, il volto a' piè rinverte.

13  Some prone are lying, others stand erect,
14  This with the head, and that one with the soles;
15  Another, bow-like, face to feet inverts.

16  Quando noi fummo fatti tanto avante,
17  ch'al mio maestro piacque di mostrarmi
18  la creatura ch'ebbe il bel sembiante,

16  When in advance so far we had proceeded,
17  That it my Master pleased to show to me
18  The creature who once had the beauteous semblance,

19  d'innanzi mi si tolse e fé restarmi,
20  “Ecco Dite,” dicendo, “ed ecco il loco
21  ove convien che di fortezza t'armi.”

19  He from before me moved and made me stop,
20  Saying: "Behold Dis, and behold the place
21  Where thou with fortitude must arm thyself."

22  Com' io divenni allor gelato e fioco,
23  nol dimandar, lettor, ch'i' non lo scrivo,
24  però ch'ogne parlar sarebbe poco.

22  How frozen I became and powerless then,
23  Ask it not, Reader, for I write it not,
24  Because all language would be insufficient.

25  Io non mori' e non rimasi vivo;
26  pensa oggimai per te, s'hai fior d'ingegno,
27  qual io divenni, d'uno e d'altro privo.

25  I did not die, and I alive remained not;
26  Think for thyself now, hast thou aught of wit,
27  What I became, being of both deprived.

28  Lo 'mperador del doloroso regno
29  da mezzo 'l petto uscia fuor de la ghiaccia;
30  e più con un gigante io mi convegno,

28  The Emperor of the kingdom dolorous
29  From his mid-breast forth issued from the ice;
30  And better with a giant I compare

31  che i giganti non fan con le sue braccia:
32  vedi oggimai quant' esser dee quel tutto
33  ch'a così fatta parte si confaccia.

31  Than do the giants with those arms of his;
32  Consider now how great must be that whole,
33  Which unto such a part conforms itself.

34  S'el fu sì bel com' elli è ora brutto,
35  e contra 'l suo fattore alzò le ciglia,
36  ben dee da lui procedere ogne lutto.

34  Were he as fair once, as he now is foul,
35  And lifted up his brow against his Maker,
36  Well may proceed from him all tribulation.

37  Oh quanto parve a me gran maraviglia
38  quand' io vidi tre facce a la sua testa!
39  L'una dinanzi, e quella era vermiglia;

37  O, what a marvel it appeared to me,
38  When I beheld three faces on his head!
39  The one in front, and that vermilion was;

40  l'altr' eran due, che s'aggiugnieno a questa
41  sovresso 'l mezzo di ciascuna spalla,
42  e sé giugnieno al loco de la cresta:

40  Two were the others, that were joined with this
41  Above the middle part of either shoulder,
42  And they were joined together at the crest;

43  e la destra parea tra bianca e gialla;
44  la sinistra a vedere era tal, quali
45  vegnon di là onde 'l Nilo s'avvalla.

43  And the right-hand one seemed 'twixt white and yellow;
44  The left was such to look upon as those
45  Who come from where the Nile falls valley-ward.

46  Sotto ciascuna uscivan due grand' ali,
47  quanto si convenia a tanto uccello:
48  vele di mar non vid' io mai cotali.

46  Underneath each came forth two mighty wings,
47  Such as befitting were so great a bird;
48  Sails of the sea I never saw so large.

49  Non avean penne, ma di vispistrello
50  era lor modo; e quelle svolazzava,
51  sì che tre venti si movean da ello:

49  No feathers had they, but as of a bat
50  Their fashion was; and he was waving them,
51  So that three winds proceeded forth therefrom.

52  quindi Cocito tutto s'aggelava.
53  Con sei occhi piangëa, e per tre menti
54  gocciava 'l pianto e sanguinosa bava.

52  Thereby Cocytus wholly was congealed.
53  With six eyes did he weep, and down three chins
54  Trickled the tear-drops and the bloody drivel.

55  Da ogne bocca dirompea co' denti
56  un peccatore, a guisa di maciulla,
57  sì che tre ne facea così dolenti.

55  At every mouth he with his teeth was crunching
56  A sinner, in the manner of a brake,
57  So that he three of them tormented thus.

58  A quel dinanzi il mordere era nulla
59  verso 'l graffiar, che tal volta la schiena
60  rimanea de la pelle tutta brulla.

58  To him in front the biting was as naught
59  Unto the clawing, for sometimes the spine
60  Utterly stripped of all the skin remained.

61  “Quell' anima là sù c'ha maggior pena,”
62  disse 'l maestro, “è Giuda Scarïotto,
63  che 'l capo ha dentro e fuor le gambe mena.

61  "That soul up there which has the greatest pain,"
62  The Master said, "is Judas Iscariot;
63  With head inside, he plies his legs without.

64  De li altri due c'hanno il capo di sotto,
65  quel che pende dal nero ceffo è Bruto:
66  vedi come si storce, e non fa motto!;

64  Of the two others, who head downward are,
65  The one who hangs from the black jowl is Brutus;
66  See how he writhes himself, and speaks no word.

67  e l'altro è Cassio, che par sì membruto.
68   Ma la notte risurge, e oramai
69   è da partir, ché tutto avem veduto.”

67  And the other, who so stalwart seems, is Cassius.
68  But night is reascending, and 'tis time
69  That we depart, for we have seen the whole."

70  Com' a lui piacque, il collo li avvinghiai;
71  ed el prese di tempo e loco poste,
72  e quando l'ali fuoro aperte assai,

70  As seemed him good, I clasped him round the neck,
71  And he the vantage seized of time and place,
72  And when the wings were opened wide apart,

73  appigliò sé a le vellute coste;
74  di vello in vello giù discese poscia
75  tra 'l folto pelo e le gelate croste.

73  He laid fast hold upon the shaggy sides;
74  From fell to fell descended downward then
75  Between the thick hair and the frozen crust.

76  Quando noi fummo là dove la coscia
77  si volge, a punto in sul grosso de l'anche,
78  lo duca, con fatica e con angoscia,
76  When we were come to where the thigh revolves
77  Exactly on the thickness of the haunch,
78  The Guide, with labour and with hard-drawn breath,
79  volse la testa ov' elli avea le zanche,
80  e aggrappossi al pel com' om che sale,
81  sì che 'n inferno i' credea tornar anche.
79  Turned round his head where he had had his legs,
80  And grappled to the hair, as one who mounts,
81  So that to Hell I thought we were returning.
82  “Attienti ben, ché per cotali scale,”
83  disse 'l maestro, ansando com' uom lasso,
84  “conviensi dipartir da tanto male.”
82  "Keep fast thy hold, for by such stairs as these,"
83  The Master said, panting as one fatigued,
84  "Must we perforce depart from so much evil."
85  Poi uscì fuor per lo fóro d'un sasso
86  e puose me in su l'orlo a sedere;
87  appresso porse a me l'accorto passo.
85  Then through the opening of a rock he issued,
86  And down upon the margin seated me;
87  Then tow'rds me he outstretched his wary step.
88  Io levai li occhi e credetti vedere
89  Lucifero com' io l'avea lasciato,
90  e vidili le gambe in sù tenere;

88  I lifted up mine eyes and thought to see
89  Lucifer in the same way I had left him;
90  And I beheld him upward hold his legs.

91  e s'io divenni allora travagliato,
92  la gente grossa il pensi, che non vede
93  qual è quel punto ch'io avea passato.

91  And if I then became disquieted,
92  Let stolid people think who do not see
93  What the point is beyond which I had passed.

94  “Lèvati sù,” disse 'l maestro, “in piede:
95  la via è lunga e 'l cammino è malvagio,
96  e già il sole a mezza terza riede.”

94  "Rise up," the Master said, "upon thy feet;
95  The way is long, and difficult the road,
96  And now the sun to middle-tierce returns."

97  Non era camminata di palagio
98  là 'v' eravam, ma natural burella
99  ch'avea mal suolo e di lume disagio.

97  It was not any palace corridor
98  There where we were, but dungeon natural,
99  With floor uneven and unease of light.

100  “Prima ch'io de l'abisso mi divella,
101  maestro mio,” diss' io quando fui dritto,
102  “a trarmi d'erro un poco mi favella:

100  "Ere from the abyss I tear myself away,
101  My Master," said I when I had arisen,
102  "To draw me from an error speak a little;

103  ov' è la ghiaccia? e questi com' è fitto
104  sì sottosopra? e come, in sì poc' ora,
105  da sera a mane ha fatto il sol tragitto?”

103  Where is the ice? and how is this one fixed
104  Thus upside down? and how in such short time
105  From eve to morn has the sun made his transit?"

106  Ed elli a me: “Tu imagini ancora
107  d'esser di là dal centro, ov' io mi presi
108  al pel del vermo reo che 'l mondo fóra.

106  And he to me: "Thou still imaginest
107  Thou art beyond the centre, where I grasped
108  The hair of the fell worm, who mines the world.

109  Di là fosti cotanto quant' io scesi;
110  quand' io mi volsi, tu passasti 'l punto
111  al qual si traggon d'ogne parte i pesi.

109  That side thou wast, so long as I descended;
110  When round I turned me, thou didst pass the point
111  To which things heavy draw from every side,

112  E se' or sotto l'emisperio giunto
113  ch'è contraposto a quel che la gran secca
114  coverchia, e sotto 'l cui colmo consunto

112  And now beneath the hemisphere art come
113  Opposite that which overhangs the vast
114  Dry-land, and 'neath whose cope was put to death

115  fu l'uom che nacque e visse sanza pecca;
116  tu hai i piedi in su picciola spera
117  che l'altra faccia fa de la Giudecca.

115  The Man who without sin was born and lived.
116  Thou hast thy feet upon the little sphere
117  Which makes the other face of the Judecca.

118  Qui è da man, quando di là è sera;
119  e questi, che ne fé scala col pelo,
120  fitto è ancora si come prim' era.

118  Here it is morn when it is evening there;
119  And he who with his hair a stairway made us
120  Still fixed remaineth as he was before.

121  Da questa parte cadde giù dal cielo;
122  e la terra, che pria di qua si sporse,
123  per paura di lui fé del mar velo,

121  Upon this side he fell down out of heaven;
122  And all the land, that whilom here emerged,
123  For fear of him made of the sea a veil,

124  e venne a l'emisperio nostro; e forse
125  per fuggir lui lasciò qui loco vòto
126  quella ch'appar di qua, e sù ricorse.”

124  And came to our hemisphere; and peradventure
125  To flee from him, what on this side appears
126  Left the place vacant here, and back recoiled."

127  Luogo è là giù da Belzebù remoto
128  tanto quanto la tomba si distende,
129  che non per vista, ma per suono è noto

127  A place there is below, from Beelzebub
128  As far receding as the tomb extends,
129  Which not by sight is known, but by the sound

130  d'un ruscelletto che quivi discende
131  per la buca d'un sasso, ch'elli ha roso,
132  col corso ch'elli avvolge, e poco pende.

130  Of a small rivulet, that there descendeth
131  Through chasm within the stone, which it has gnawed
132  With course that winds about and slightly falls.

133  Lo duca e io per quel cammino ascoso
134  intrammo a ritornar nel chiaro mondo;
135  e sanza cura aver d'alcun riposo,

133  The Guide and I into that hidden road
134  Now entered, to return to the bright world;
135  And without care of having any rest

136  salimmo sù, el primo e io secondo,
137  tanto ch'i' vidi de le cose belle
138  che porta 'l ciel, per un pertugio tondo.

136  We mounted up, he first and I the second,
137  Till I beheld through a round aperture
138  Some of the beauteous things that Heaven doth bear;

139  E quindi uscimmo a riveder le stelle.

139  Thence we came forth to rebehold the stars.

Purgatorio: Canto I
Yeats asks: "What's water but the generated soul, and the first canto of the Purgatorio makes reference to water, that element of which a human being is mostly comprised.  Water, the sea, is our source, perhaps our destiny, and in the first six lines here the text returns us to an image we met with in Canto I of the Inferno where we saw the figure of the exhausted swimmer looking back on the rough waters that almost drowned him.  This fugal or parallel construction or formal structure or whatever you want to call it is one of many technical conjurings embodied in the Commedia as a text.  The cantos will not only show progression, that is to say a narrative impetus, but also a sort of metaphoric self-reflectiveness, the facets, as in this example where the two Canto Ones, that of the Inferno and the Purgatorio, show the same figure (a passage over dangerous rough waters) in completely different lights.  (In the first canto of the Paradiso we will be immersed in a different element, not that of water, but that of light.)  Dante has gone so far in this that he has even cryptologically embedded messages so that the surface of the text when viewed in a certain manner contains subtexts.  For example, he cryptographically inserts his name in all three of his canticles’ opening cantos.  (See The Cryptography of Dante by Walter Arensbery, Alfred A Knopf, 1921.)  The devoted reader can find other examples of this procedure.  For example, here, in the terza starting at line 106, Cato tells the protagonists that they must take another, easier ascent, and remember Virgil's advice in Canto I  of the Inferno (line 91), that the aspirant must take another, harder road.  In this first case, the much more difficult path of descent and passage through Hell, and in the second a stairway to heaven.  This whole poem is about transcendence, and again and again, the text dazzles by immersing us in/on a journey where the transformations of the elements of the poem continually morph and transcend their original purposes.  And isn't this exactly how our mind works?  For example, say that when you were a child, while wearing a red plaid shirt, your mother scolds you, and your emotion of sadness and shame is anchored to the trigger of a red plaid.  Years later, your wife goes into labor with your first child, and in another plaid shirt, you experience the great joy of birth.  Same plaid, two different feeling tones, and so these multiple reflections and refractions build up a deep and complex layering of associations which constitute the curious phenomenon that we refer to when we say "I."  The Buddhist say Samsara is Nirvana, that is, the ordinary world is also the Bliss World.  Dante might add something like what we witness constantly on the historical plane, in politics, economics, and religion: "The ordinary world is also the Hell-world."  Milton makes the same point when he says: "The mind is its own place, and in itself can make a heaven of hell, a hell of heaven."  And Blake returns to this subject again and again of how the sublunary world is also the transcendent world.  "A fool sees not the same tree that a wise man sees.  He whose face gives no light shall never become a star."  Dante makes his worlds of Hell, Purgatory, and Paradise palpable as geography, but we should not forget that in the end the truth of these geographies, their very existence, as is the case with every physical place in every historical time, is a quality of mind, and mind itself is a process where memory might transport itself into terror or into bliss.  This then seems to be what the Divine Comedy is all about.  I say seems, because that explanation is too facile, and would suggest that what we are talking about is a brain-state, something producible by a chemical or a meditation process, that is to say, something knowable, hackable, as contemporary parlance might put it, but is that true?  Reading the poem, and taking it both lightly and deeply as something that has consequence in our lives, holds out the promise of experiencing something not so easily attributable to any world of science or theology, though we are desperate, in our ego-self, to believe that this is possible.

Besides the symmetries noted above, a far stranger conjunction exists between Canto I of the Inferno and Canto I of the Purgatorio.  Namely, the guides are both pagans!  Virgil, a poet and Cato, a politician — and a politician who was in addition guilty of the mortal sin of suicide.  How could he be among the saved at all?  Dante's contemporary Christian audience would or at least should have been appalled by such an outrage, but I think Dante is asserting here that orthodox thinking can only get us so far, and that transcendence is about boundary-breaking.  Cato is a very funny kind of pagan, but it's clear that Dante sees him as a sort of Christ figure, a savior, at least in the political sense if not the spiritual sense, who offers himself as a scapegoat for the principle of freedom.  Now here we might recall all the political rigmarole in Canto I of the Inferno about that allegorized political savior, "the Greyhound", and thus, reading, we might sense how politics and poetics get married in the poem in many strange juxtapositions.   Then there is the curious attempt by Virgil to bribe Cato by an appeal to Cato's feeling for his wife, Marcia, whom Virgil can speak to as her fellow denizen in Hell.  It doesn't work.  Cato has transcended not only any goad of lust, but any attachment to what the physical organ of the eyes might present of the physical world.  Next we have Cato reiterate Beatrice's remark that she is untouched by the sufferings of those in Hell, by telling Virgil of his indifference to Marcia.  But then Virgil pulls his trump card: Heavenly ladies have ordained that Dante be saved, and just as this tact was an open sesame to the demons in Hell, so too, Cato is instantly moved (as was Virgil) to assist the aspirant.  From a Jungian perspective, this is another foreshadowing of Dante's future spiritual consummation with his animus, Beatrice, for whom all his poetry is written, as he himself says elsewhere, as love letters to a divine lady.  But Cato is not in heaven because of something he did in politics (war being also but a violent extension of politics, and civil war the most vile), but because his suicide is a renunciation of politics, and indeed, at least in Dante's view, a renunciation of the entire pagan world — leap of faith without the object of faith to redeem him.  His suicide is an affirmation of freedom in a spiritual future, that is, a realm of freedom where the neediness of the physical body is expunged in favor of the fulfillment of a spiritual body.  Virgil, the poet, never renounces poetry, and in particular, he never renounces that pagan element of poetry which sings of arms and the man.  Certainly, Dante, as poet is not about to "sing of arms and the man", some soldier "exiled by fate", and set off on a journey of conquest to change himself from an alien intruder in a strange land, to the founder of a homeland in Latinia.  Virgil is trapped in the historical consequences of his fate, a fate that is strangely intractable, frozen as it is by its fixed view of the past, a condition shared by everyone in Hell.  Trapped by Time, they cannot move through Time, which is precisely what Dante, the aspirant, is doing, and what Cato his done as a consequence of his extreme renunciation.  Let's add here also, Giuseppe Mazzotta's comments about an old man being the icon for the future, whereas traditionally the future is represented by a baby (think of the New Year's Baby), a youth or a maiden.  Mazzotta says this astonishing representation by Dante has been prompted by the poet's understanding that the past is not just some kind of Freudian trash heap which determines the present self, but is also a repository of seeds for new possibilities.  In other words, the past too is not predetermined in its outcomes, but is a possible source for many possible outcomes, and here, senescence itself, seen from the viewpoint as a repository of many experiences, becomes a sort of nursery for many possible scenarios, including the possibility of a future, non-physical bliss.  This idea of old age as a cornucopia of infant possibilities can only come into existence if the concept of Time, and with it deterministic cause and effect, is changed.  Purgatorio is a place where Time works change, not a place like the final circle of Hell, where Time is immutably frozen in a system of violations and retributions, where suffering is not only eternal, but absolutely meaningless for he sufferers themselves, who have become mechanical slaves to a kind of moral doctrine of survival of the vilest.  In the Purgatorio Time is more like an expanding sphere in which everything has the characteristic of what we might call the future, a condition in which possibilities may manifest, and even the past can be reinterpreted and used as a resource to expand those possibilities.  And although we will still proceed in the stream of Time as a developing narration, the hint from the invocation is that that stream is headed to that Egyptian ocean: The sky.  Yes, by all those references to the stars as Time signatures visible in the Heavens, the text has now brought as back to the initial conditions of the first two humans, seeing what might be called a celestial or metaphysical sky, whereas after the fall, they can only see an earthly or material one.   The invocation, is also to Calliope, mother of Orpheus, whose sort of wrong-ended attempt to rescue Persephone from Hades is put right by Dante, because it's the other way around.  It is Beatrice who from heaven rescues her beloved from Hell.  Dante is an Orphic poet, in that he intends his song to transfix our Nature-body, but he is more than Orphic, he is messianic, a prophet, not in the sense of predicting the future but in the sense of making freedom possible in an ever enriching Time.  

Finally we  have the baptismal motif, the purification ritual which Cato commands.  Again, we are back to water.  We should remember the earlier metaphors of frozen plants being revived by the sun, but here it is something altogether amazing in that it is the dew not yet evaporated by the sun which Virgil uses to cleanse his protege.  Dew and tears — we've just seen tears frozen in the last two canto's of Hell, but here they mean something totally different.  These are tears of joy or release, and they flow down like justice in the mighty stream which is the triumphant last two canticles of the Commedia.  The protagonists are wandering, exiled on a desert plain — and as Proust remind us, Sodom and Gomorrah are cities of the plain — but Dante, the aspirant, still glimpses from afar the trembling of the sea.  That sea is death, whom none who have ever crossed return.  How singular is Dante's position, and how singular the poet's task, through some kind of extreme self-abnegation, the poet is able to go like Orpheus into Hell, and return, or go through Purgatory to Heaven, and live to express that transcendence in a poem.

Something that struck me in the protagonists' meeting with Cato, was that when Cato renounces has earthly wife, Marcia, Dante then has leave to renounce his wife, Gemma, both instances reiterating Christs pronouncement: "For in the resurrection they neither marry nor are given in marraige, but are live God's angels in Heaven.  And yet the old pagan suicide and the Hell-scorched Dante make for very unorthodox bachelors!  Once the reader travels with Dante for a while, all kinds of pictures flash into the mind, all kinds of connections, all kinds of psychological states, all kinds of philosophical and cosmological speculations, and most of all, all kinds wonder from the sheer beauty and intensity of the poetry. 

We should not leave this canto without considering the rushes found growing around this desert island, the rushes which can survive like the rocks, but with suppleness not durance (how very Zen!), the poundings of the surf, the rushes that arise from the washy ooze, and even when plucked immediately resurrect themselves.  What a faith Dante had in the resilience and healing powers of Nature!  And hasn't the aspirant also pulled his soiled self up by the very roots by traversing Hell?   His way down to the very heat-death and collapse of the physical universe has led, through all that darkness and pain, to a way through and beyond.  Through poetry, he has done what no mortal body without spiritual transformation can ever do.  He has discovered a way to transcendence without having to deny the presence of evil.  And except through poetry, no other use of language can accomplish this.  The aspirant is girded about by one of these rushes, and we think of those Mideastern myths going back to the earliest writings and present in the story of Moses or the orphan child of the waters found floating in a wicker or rush basket.  Again another instance of the layering of motifs, for now the vessel of deliverance, the boat or cradle if you will is transformed as a sort of badge of protection, a sort of prophylactic against any future plunge back to the inferno.  Paradise has not yet been found, but it is inevitably promised.  The many mysteries pertaining to this rush will always run off in any direction that we might devotedly follow, and even in the seeming chaos of the ocean, their currents will always flow upward to the vaporization of water and the crystallization of light.       
  
1  Per correr miglior acque alza le vele
2  omai la navicella del mio ingegno,
3  che lascia dietro a sé mar sì crudele;

1  To run o'er better waters hoists its sail
2  The little vessel of my genius now,
3  That leaves behind itself a sea so cruel;

4  e canterò di quel secondo regno
5  dove l'umano spirito si purga
6  e di salire al ciel diventa degno.

4  And of that second kingdom will I sing
5  Wherein the human spirit doth purge itself,
6  And to ascend to heaven becometh worthy.

7  Ma qui la morta poesì resurga,
8  o sante Muse, poi che vostro sono;
9  e qui Calïopè alquanto surga,

7  But let dead Poesy here rise again,
8  O holy Muses, since that I am yours,
9  And here Calliope somewhat ascend,

10  seguitando il mio canto con quel suono
11  di cui le Piche misere sentiro
12  lo colpo tal, che disperar perdono.

10  My song accompanying with that sound,
11  Of which the miserable magpies felt
12  The blow so great, that they despaired of pardon.

13  Dolce color d'orïental zaffiro,
14  che s'accoglieva nel sereno aspetto
15  del mezzo, puro infino al primo giro,

13  Sweet colour of the oriental sapphire,
14  That was upgathered in the cloudless aspect
15  Of the pure air, as far as the first circle,

16  a li occhi miei ricominciò diletto,
17  tosto ch'io usci' fuor de l'aura morta
18  che m'avea contristati li occhi e 'l petto.

16  Unto mine eyes did recommence delight
17  Soon as I issued forth from the dead air,
18  Which had with sadness filled mine eyes and breast.

19  Lo bel pianeto che d'amar conforta
20  faceva tutto rider l'orïente,
21  velando i Pesci ch'erano in sua scorta.

19  The beauteous planet, that to love incites,
20  Was making all the orient to laugh,
21  Veiling the Fishes that were in her escort.

22  I' mi volsi a man destra, e puosi mente
23  a l'altro polo, e vidi quattro stelle
24  non viste mai fuor ch'a la prima gente.

22  To the right hand I turned, and fixed my mind
23  Upon the other pole, and saw four stars
24  Ne'er seen before save by the primal people.

25  Goder pareva 'l ciel di lor fiammelle:
26  oh settentrïonal vedovo sito,
27  poi che privato se' di mirar quelle!

25  Rejoicing in their flamelets seemed the heaven.
26  O thou septentrional and widowed site,
27  Because thou art deprived of seeing these!

28  Com' io da loro sguardo fui partito,
29  un poco me volgendo a l'altro polo,
30  là onde 'l Carro già era sparito,

28  When from regarding them I had withdrawn,
29  Turning a little to the other pole,
30  There where the Wain had disappeared already,

31  vidi presso di me un veglio solo,
32  degno di tanta reverenza in vista,
33  che più non dee a padre alcun figliuolo.

31  I saw beside me an old man alone,
32  Worthy of so much reverence in his look,
33  That more owes not to father any son.

34  Lunga la barba e di pel bianco mista
35  portava, a' suoi capelli simigliante,
36  de' quai cadeva al petto doppia lista.

34  A long beard and with white hair intermingled
35  He wore, in semblance like unto the tresses,
36  Of which a double list fell on his breast.

37  Li raggi de le quattro luci sante
38  fregiavan sì la sua faccia di lume,
39  ch'i' 'l vedea come 'l sol fosse davante.

37  The rays of the four consecrated stars
38  Did so adorn his countenance with light,
39  That him I saw as were the sun before him.

40  “Chi siete voi che contro al cieco fiume
41  fuggita avete la pregione etterna?”
42  diss' el, movendo quelle oneste piume.

40  "Who are you? ye who, counter the blind river,
41  Have fled away from the eternal prison?"
42  Moving those venerable plumes, he said:

43  “Chi v'ha guidati, o che vi fu lucerna,
44  uscendo fuor de la profonda notte
45  che sempre nera fa la valle inferna?

43  "Who guided you? or who has been your lamp
44  In issuing forth out of the night profound,
45  That ever black makes the infernal valley?

46  Son le leggi d'abisso così rotte?
47  o è mutato in ciel novo consiglio,
48  che, dannati, venite a le mie grotte?”

46  The laws of the abyss, are they thus broken?
47  Or is there changed in heaven some council new,
48  That being damned ye come unto my crags?"

49  Lo duca mio allor mi diè di piglio,
50  e con parole e con mani e con cenni
51  reverenti mi fé le gambe e 'l ciglio.

49  Then did my Leader lay his grasp upon me,
50  And with his words, and with his hands and signs,
51  Reverent he made in me my knees and brow;

52  Poscia rispuose lui: “Da me non venni:
53  donna scese del ciel, per li cui prieghi
54  de la mia compagnia costui sovvenni.

52  Then answered him: "I came not of myself;
53  A Lady from Heaven descended, at whose prayers
54  I aided this one with my company.

55  Ma da ch'è tuo voler che più si spieghi
56  di nostra condizion com' ell' è vera,
57  esser non puote il mio che a te si nieghi.

55  But since it is thy will more be unfolded
56  Of our condition, how it truly is,
57  Mine cannot be that this should be denied thee.

58  Questi non vide mai l'ultima sera;
59  ma per la sua follia le fu sì presso,
60  che molto poco tempo a volger era.

58  This one has never his last evening seen,
59  But by his folly was so near to it
60  That very little time was there to turn.

61  Sì com' io dissi, fui mandato ad esso
62  per lui campare; e non lì era altra via
63  che questa per la quale i' mi son messo.

61  As I have said, I unto him was sent
62  To rescue him, and other way was none
63  Than this to which I have myself betaken.

64  Mostrata ho lui tutta la gente ria;
65  e ora intendo mostrar quelli spirti
66  che purgan sé sotto la tua balìa.

64  I've shown him all the people of perdition,
65  And now those spirits I intend to show
66  Who purge themselves beneath thy guardianship.

67  Com' io l'ho tratto, saria lungo a dirti;
68  de l'alto scende virtù che m'aiuta
69  conducerlo a vederti e a udirti.

67  How I have brought him would be long to tell thee.
68  Virtue descendeth from on high that aids me
69  To lead him to behold thee and to hear thee.

70  Or ti piaccia gradir la sua venuta:
71  libertà va cercando, ch'è sì cara
72  come sa chi per lei vita rifiuta.

70  Now may it please thee to vouchsafe his coming;
71  He seeketh Liberty, which is so dear,
72  As knoweth he who life for her refuses.

73  Tu 'l sai, ché non ti fu per lei amara
74  in Utica la morte, ove lasciasti
75  la vesta ch'al gran dì sarà sì chiara.

73  Thou know'st it; since, for her, to thee not bitter
74  Was death in Utica, where thou didst leave
75  The vesture, that will shine so, the great day.

76  Non son li editti etterni per noi guasti,
77  ché questi vive e Minòs me non lega;
78  ma son del cerchio ove son li occhi casti


76  Eyes of thy Marcia, who in looks still prays thee,
77  O holy breast, to hold her as thine own;
78  For her love, then, incline thyself to us.

79  di Marzia tua, che 'n vista ancor ti priega,
80  o santo petto, che per tua la tegni:
81  per lo suo amore adunque a noi ti piega.

79  Eyes of thy Marcia, who in looks still prays thee,
80  O holy breast, to hold her as thine own;
81  For her love, then, incline thyself to us.

82  Lasciane andar per li tuoi sette regni;
83  grazie riporterò di te a lei,
84  se d'esser mentovato là giù degni.”

82  Permit us through thy sevenfold realm to go;
83  I will take back this grace from thee to her,
84  If to be mentioned there below thou deignest."

85  “Marzïa piacque tanto a li occhi miei
86  mentre ch'i' fu' di là,” diss' elli allora,
87  “che quante grazie volse da me, fei.

85  "Marcia so pleasing was unto mine eyes
86  While I was on the other side," then said he,
87  "That every grace she wished of me I granted;

88  Or che di là dal mal fiume dimora,
89  più muover non mi può, per quella legge
90  che fatta fu quando me n'usci' fora.

88  Now that she dwells beyond the evil river,
89  She can no longer move me, by that law
90  Which, when I issued forth from there, was made.

91  Ma se donna del ciel ti move e regge,
92  come tu di', non c'è mestier lusinghe:
93  bastisi ben che per lei mi richegge.

91  But if a Lady of Heaven do move and rule thee,
92  As thou dost say, no flattery is needful;
93  Let it suffice thee that for her thou ask me.

94  Va dunque, e fa che tu costui ricinghe
95  d'un giunco schietto e che li lavi 'l viso,
96  sì ch'ogne sucidume quindi stinghe;

94  Go, then, and see thou gird this one about
95  With a smooth rush, and that thou wash his face,
96  So that thou cleanse away all stain therefrom,

97  ché non si converria, l'occhio sorpriso
98  d'alcuna nebbia, andar dinanzi al primo
99  ministro, ch'è di quei di paradiso.

97  For 'twere not fitting that the eye o'ercast
98  By any mist should go before the first
99  Angel, who is of those of Paradise.

100  Questa isoletta intorno ad imo ad imo,
101  là giù colà dove la batte l'onda,
102  porta di giunchi sovra 'l molle limo:

100  This little island round about its base
101  Below there, yonder, where the billow beats it,
102  Doth rushes bear upon its washy ooze;

103  null' altra pianta che facesse fronda
104  o indurasse, vi puote aver vita,
105  però ch'a le percosse non seconda.

103  No other plant that putteth forth the leaf,
104  Or that doth indurate, can there have life,
105  Because it yieldeth not unto the shocks.

106  Poscia non sia di qua vostra reddita;
107  lo sol vi mosterrà, che surge omai,
108  prendere il monte a più lieve salita.”

106  Thereafter be not this way your return;
107  The sun, which now is rising, will direct you
108  To take the mount by easier ascent."


109  Così sparì; e io sù mi levai
110  sanza parlare, e tutto mi ritrassi
111  al duca mio, e li occhi a lui drizzai.

109  With this he vanished; and I raised me up
110  Without a word, and wholly drew myself
111  Unto my Guide, and turned mine eyes to him.

112  El cominciò: “Figliuol, segui i miei passi:
113  volgianci in dietro, ché di qua dichina
114  questa pianura a' suoi termini bassi.”

112  And he began: "Son, follow thou my steps;
113  Let us turn back, for on this side declines
114  The plain unto its lower boundaries."

115  L'alba vinceva l'ora mattutina
116  che fuggia innanzi, sì che di lontano
117  conobbi il tremolar de la marina.

115  The dawn was vanquishing the matin hour
116  Which fled before it, so that from afar
117  I recognised the trembling of the sea.

118  Noi andavam per lo solingo piano
119  com' om che torna a la perduta strada,
120  che 'nfino ad essa li pare ire in vano.

118  Along the solitary plain we went
119  As one who unto the lost road returns,
120  And till he finds it seems to go in vain.

121  Quando noi fummo là 've la rugiada
122  pugna col sole, per essere in parte
123  dove, ad orezza, poco si dirada,

121  As soon as we were come to where the dew
122  Fights with the sun, and, being in a part
123  Where shadow falls, little evaporates,

124  ambo le mani in su l'erbetta sparte
125  soavemente 'l mio maestro pose:
126  ond' io, che fui accorto di sua arte,

124  Both of his hands upon the grass outspread
125  In gentle manner did my Master place;
126  Whence I, who of his action was aware,

127  porsi ver' lui le guance lagrimose;
128  ivi mi fece tutto discoverto
129  quel color che l'inferno mi nascose.

127  Extended unto him my tearful cheeks;
128  There did he make in me uncovered wholly
129  That hue which Hell had covered up in me.

130  Venimmo poi in sul lito diserto,
131  che mai non vide navicar sue acque
132  omo, che di tornar sia poscia esperto.

130  Then came we down upon the desert shore
131  Which never yet saw navigate its waters
132  Any that afterward had known return.

133  Quivi mi cinse sì com' altrui piacque:
134  oh maraviglia! ché qual elli scelse
135  l'umile pianto, cotal si rinacque

133  There he begirt me as the other pleased;
134  O marvellous! for even as he culled
135  The humble plant, such it sprang up again

136  subitamente là onde l'avelse.

136  Suddenly there where he uprooted it.

Purgatorio: Canto II
The first 30 lines of this canto might be summarized as the resurrection of light, sight, vision, time, and distance.  What an immense spectacle we enjoy here after the last dark, frozen narrowness of Hell!  Here we view a metaphysical Earth with Jerusalem at the center, the site of the crucifixion, the Ganges 90° to the east, the antipodes, 180° to the south, and Cadiz in Spain, 270° off the meridian.  This puts us inside the clock of a great half-dome, each quadrant of which holds its six of the 24 hours, and the protagonists are at the antipodes, at dawn — and a lot has changed.  We have an animus figure, Aurora, who lights the world, colors glowing warmly, white, vermillion, orange, the black smoke of night sinking with the red star of Mars, its fire sinking below the ocean floor.  In the sky, the stars are fading, the constellation Libra, the scales of justice, not visible at the Autumn solstice, opposite where we are in the spring solstice, with the sun in Aries (Mars).  The point here is that we are at a time and place of a new beginning, and it is just as it was at the beginning of Canto I of the Inferno, the protagonists are confused, lost — in a condition of exile, having just escaped a condition of bondage.  We should remember the repetition of the hear/see motif in Hell, because Hell is dark, and the ears are the organs that can first penetrate its horrors.  Now we have the see/hear motif, a reversal, because we have come to a place where the light, just as was the darkness in Hell, is overwhelming.  So, just as we saw in the previous canto, how the same images deliver many, and sometimes opposite messages, hear we have different images — night and day — delivering the same message: both overwhelm at the extremes.  With Libra's balance gone, and with it Aristotle's golden mean, we find ourselves at another extreme, this time, not the extreme of criminality, but the extreme of ignorance.  We simply don't know where to go or what to do.

Returning to our hear/see motif reversal to one of see/hear: Notice how precise Dante’s description is of how the eyes actually function when going from dark to light.  In lines 13 - 24, he takes us through a process in which we proceed from the blindness of dark to the blindness of overwhelming light, from an ominous ambiguity to a hopeful one.  The sight of the angel of transport is truly awesome, and its power and radiance command only one human response: humility.  Now think back to Canto II of the Inferno, when we get a secondhand account of the intercession of Beatrice.  In both cases brightness dispersed darkness.  There are so many examples of what we might call Dante’s network of protean extended metaphors that we can hardly keep up with them, but unconsciously we always have a sense that the Commedia is some kind of linguistic embodiment of the themes it presents.

Mazzotta has written an entire book to show that the Commedia is Dante’s recapitulation of the Biblical theme of Exodus, and the new souls being ported to Purgatory and singing psalm 114 concerning Israel’s deliverance makes his point.  They sing with one voice, a far cry from the cacophonies emitted by the souls in hell, who cry and moan their own individual fates, and never show any solidarity with one another.  Although they, like the souls here, are almost literally in the same boat.

This canto concludes with Dante meeting his friend, the singer, Casella. There is what by now the familiar trope of the shades' shock of finding a living person in this place reserved for the dead.  When Dante tries to embrace his friend, three times his arms pass through him.  We might ask, how is Virgil able in so many instances able to pick up Dante, if Virgil is a substanceless shade?  Maybe this device, which defies mortal logic, is actually meant to be mysterious. In effect, the device is meant to put the reader in the same emotional position as that of the shades when they encounter a living body.  That is to say, the state of awe.  Now Casella sings a song and entrances the whole company of recent immigrants. The lyrics of this song are Dante’s own, and this song was chosen specifically at Dante’s request.  Cato arrives and chastises the company, and they all scatter like frightened pigeons.  This a denunciation.  If the poet in the previous canto renounces the poetry of war and armed heroism, here he renounces troubadorian love poetry.  Both of these kinds of poetry are sources of pride, and pride is an anchor whose weight is too great to allow the soul to ascend.  Dante intends a new kind of poetry, which will be, for want of a better term: scriptural.  That is the path that Dante's poetry has now chosen, and he makes this clear by the contrast between the psalm that the pilgrims are singing as they arrive, and the song that Dante asks Casella to sing.  However wonderful and captivating the latter is, it is not the kind of music that will bring the soul nearer to its source.  That is Cato's reprimand.  For me too, there is a pun linking the name Cato with the Italian word gatto (cat), and indeed, the errant souls scatter like pigeons when cat Cato arrives.

1  Già era 'l sole a l'orizzonte giunto
2  lo cui meridïan cerchio coverchia
3  Ierusalèm col suo più alto punto;

1  Already had the sun the horizon reached
2  Whose circle of meridian covers o'er
3  Jerusalem with its most lofty point,

4  e la notte, che opposita a lui cerchia,
5  uscia di Gange fuor con le Bilance,
6  che le caggion di man quando soverchia;

4  And night that opposite to him revolves
5  Was issuing forth from Ganges with the Scales
6  That fall from out her hand when she exceedeth;

7  sì che le bianche e le vermiglie guance,
8  là dov' i' era, de la bella Aurora
9  per troppa etate divenivan rance.

7  So that the white and the vermilion cheeks
8  Of beautiful Aurora, where I was,
9  By too great age were changing into orange.

10  Noi eravam lunghesso mare ancora,
11  come gente che pensa a suo cammino,
12  che va col cuore e col corpo dimora.

10  We still were on the border of the sea,
11  Like people who are thinking of their road,
12  Who go in heart and with the body stay;

13  Ed ecco, qual, sorpreso dal mattino,
14  per li grossi vapor Marte rosseggia
15  giù nel ponente sovra 'l suol marino,

13  And lo! as when, upon the approach of morning,
14  Through the gross vapours Mars grows fiery red
15  Down in the West upon the ocean floor,

16  cotal m'apparve, s'io ancor lo veggia,
17  un lume per lo mar venir sì ratto,
18  che 'l muover suo nessun volar pareggia.

16  Appeared to me—may I again behold it!—
17  A light along the sea so swiftly coming,
18  Its motion by no flight of wing is equalled;

19  Dal qual com' io un poco ebbi ritratto
20  l'occhio per domandar lo duca mio,
21  rividil più lucente e maggior fatto.

19  From which when I a little had withdrawn
20  Mine eyes, that I might question my Conductor,
21  Again I saw it brighter grown and larger.

22  Poi d'ogne lato ad esso m'appario
23  un non sapeva che bianco, e di sotto
24  a poco a poco un altro a lui uscìo.

22  Then on each side of it appeared to me
23  I knew not what of white, and underneath it
24  Little by little there came forth another.

25  Lo mio maestro ancor non facea motto,
26  mentre che i primi bianchi apparver ali;
27  allor che ben conobbe il galeotto,

25  My Master yet had uttered not a word
26  While the first whiteness into wings unfolded;
27  But when he clearly recognised the pilot,

28  gridò: “Fa, fa che le ginocchia cali.
29  Ecco l'angel di Dio: piega le mani;
30  omai vedrai di sì fatti officiali.

28  He cried: "Make haste, make haste to bow the knee!
29  Behold the Angel of God! fold thou thy hands!
30  Henceforward shalt thou see such officers!

31  Vedi che sdegna li argomenti umani,
32  sì che remo non vuol, né altro velo
33  che l'ali sue, tra liti sì lontani.

31  See how he scorneth human arguments,
32  So that nor oar he wants, nor other sail
33  Than his own wings, between so distant shores.

34  Vedi come l'ha dritte verso 'l cielo,
35  trattando l'aere con l'etterne penne,
36  che non si mutan come mortal pelo.”

34  See how he holds them pointed up to heaven,
35  Fanning the air with the eternal pinions,
36  That do not moult themselves like mortal hair!"

37  Poi, come più e più verso noi venne
38  l'uccel divino, più chiaro appariva;
39  per che l'occhio da presso nol sostenne,

37  Then as still nearer and more near us came
38  The Bird Divine, more radiant he appeared,
39  So that near by the eye could not endure him,

40  ma chinail giuso; e quei sen venne a riva
41  con un vasello snelletto e leggero,
42  tanto che l'acqua nulla ne 'nghiottiva.

40  But down I cast it; and he came to shore
41  With a small vessel, very swift and light,
42  So that the water swallowed naught thereof.

43  Da poppa stava il celestial nocchiero,
44  tal che faria beato pur descripto;
45  e più di cento spirti entro sediero.

43  Upon the stern stood the Celestial Pilot;
44  Beatitude seemed written in his face,
45  And more than a hundred spirits sat within.

46  “In exitu Isräel de Aegypto”
47  cantavan tutti insieme ad una voce
48  con quanto di quel salmo è poscia scripto.

46  "In exitu Israel de Aegypto!"
47  They chanted all together in one voice,
48  With whatso in that psalm is after written.

49   Poi fece il segno lor di santa croce;
50   ond' ei si gittar tutti in su la piaggia:
51   ed el sen gì, come venne, veloce.

49  Then made he sign of holy rood upon them,
50  Whereat all cast themselves upon the shore,
51  And he departed swiftly as he came.

52  La turba che rimase lì, selvaggia
53  parea del loco, rimirando intorno
54  come colui che nove cose assaggia.

52  The throng which still remained there unfamiliar
53  Seemed with the place, all round about them gazing,
54  As one who in new matters makes essay.

55  Da tutte parti saettava il giorno
56  lo sol, ch'avea con le saette conte
57  di mezzo 'l ciel cacciato Capricorno,

55  On every side was darting forth the day.
56  The sun, who had with his resplendent shafts
57  From the mid-heaven chased forth the Capricorn,

58  quando la nova gente alzò la fronte
59  ver' noi, dicendo a noi: “Se voi sapete,
60  mostratene la via di gire al monte.”

58  When the new people lifted up their faces
59  Towards us, saying to us: "If ye know,
60  Show us the way to go unto the mountain."

61  E Virgilio rispuose: “Voi credete
62  forse che siamo esperti d'esto loco;
63  ma noi siam peregrin come voi siete.

61  And answer made Virgilius: "Ye believe
62  Perchance that we have knowledge of this place,
63  But we are strangers even as yourselves.

64  Dianzi venimmo, innanzi a voi un poco,
65  per altra via, che fu sì aspra e forte,
66  che lo salire omai ne parrà gioco.”

64  Just now we came, a little while before you,
65  Another way, which was so rough and steep,
66  That mounting will henceforth seem sport to us."

67  L'anime, che si fuor di me accorte,
68  per lo spirare, ch'i' era ancor vivo,
69  maravigliando diventaro smorte.

67  The souls who had, from seeing me draw breath,
68  Become aware that I was still alive,
69  Pallid in their astonishment became;

70  E come a messagger che porta ulivo
71  tragge la gente per udir novelle,
72  e di calcar nessun si mostra schivo,

70  And as to messenger who bears the olive
71  The people throng to listen to the news,
72  And no one shows himself afraid of crowding,

73  così al viso mio s'affisar quelle
74  anime fortunate tutte quante,
75  quasi oblïando d'ire a farsi belle.

73  So at the sight of me stood motionless
74  Those fortunate spirits, all of them, as if
75  Oblivious to go and make them fair.

76  Io vidi una di lor trarresi avante
77  per abbracciarmi, con sì grande affetto,
78  che mosse me a far lo somigliante.

76  One from among them saw I coming forward,
77  As to embrace me, with such great affection,
78  That it incited me to do the like.

79  Ohi ombre vane, fuor che ne l'aspetto!
80  tre volte dietro a lei le mani avvinsi,
81  e tante mi tornai con esse al petto.

79  O empty shadows, save in aspect only!
80  Three times behind it did I clasp my hands,
81  As oft returned with them to my own breast!

82  Di maraviglia, credo, mi dipinsi;
83  per che l'ombra sorrise e si ritrasse,
84  e io, seguendo lei, oltre mi pinsi.

82  I think with wonder I depicted me;
83  Whereat the shadow smiled and backward drew;
84  And I, pursuing it, pressed farther forward.

85  Soavemente disse ch'io posasse;
86  allor conobbi chi era, e pregai
87  che, per parlarmi, un poco s'arrestasse.

85  Gently it said that I should stay my steps;
86  Then knew I who it was, and I entreated
87  That it would stop awhile to speak with me.

88  Rispuosemi: “Così com' io t'amai
89  nel mortal corpo, così t'amo sciolta:
90  però m'arresto; ma tu perché vai?”

88  It made reply to me: "Even as I loved thee
89  In mortal body, so I love thee free;
90  Therefore I stop; but wherefore goest thou?"

91  “Casella mio, per tornar altra volta
92  là dov' io son, fo io questo vïaggio,”
93  diss' io; “ma a te com' è tanta ora tolta?”

91  "My own Casella! to return once more
92  There where I am, I make this journey," said I;
93  "But how from thee has so much time be taken?"

94  Ed elli a me: “Nessun m'è fatto oltraggio,
95  se quei che leva quando e cui li piace,
96  più volte m'ha negato esto passaggio;

94  And he to me: "No outrage has been done me,
95  If he who takes both when and whom he pleases
96  Has many times denied to me this passage,

97  ché di giusto voler lo suo si face:
98  veramente da tre mesi elli ha tolto
99  chi ha voluto intrar, con tutta pace.

97  For of a righteous will his own is made.
98  He, sooth to say, for three months past has taken
99  Whoever wished to enter with all peace;

100  Ond' io, ch'era ora a la marina vòlto
101  dove l'acqua di Tevero s'insala,
102  benignamente fu' da lui ricolto.

100  Whence I, who now had turned unto that shore
101  Where salt the waters of the Tiber grow,
102  Benignantly by him have been received.

103  A quella foce ha elli or dritta l'ala,
104  però che sempre quivi si ricoglie
105  qual verso Acheronte non si cala.”

103  Unto that outlet now his wing is pointed,
104  Because for evermore assemble there
105  Those who tow'rds Acheron do not descend."

106  E io: “Se nuova legge non ti toglie
107  memoria o uso a l'amoroso canto
108  che mi solea quetar tutte mie doglie,

106  And I: "If some new law take not from thee
107  Memory or practice of the song of love,
108  Which used to quiet in me all my longings,

109  di ciò ti piaccia consolare alquanto
110  l'anima mia, che, con la sua persona
111  venendo qui, è affannata tanto!”

109  Thee may it please to comfort therewithal
110  Somewhat this soul of mine, that with its body
111  Hitherward coming is so much distressed."

112  “Amor che ne la mente mi ragiona”
113  cominciò elli allor sì dolcemente,
114  che la dolcezza ancor dentro mi suona.

112  "Love, that within my mind discourses with me,"
113  Forthwith began he so melodiously,
114  The melody within me still is sounding.

115  Lo mio maestro e io e quella gente
116  ch'eran con lui parevan sì contenti,
117  come a nessun toccasse altro la mente.

115  My Master, and myself, and all that people
116  Which with him were, appeared as satisfied
117  As if naught else might touch the mind of any.

118  Noi eravam tutti fissi e attenti
119  a le sue note; ed ecco il veglio onesto
120  gridando: “Che è ciò, spiriti lenti?

118  We all of us were moveless and attentive
119  Unto his notes; and lo! the grave old man,
120  Exclaiming: "What is this, ye laggard spirits?

121  qual negligenza, quale stare è questo?
122  Correte al monte a spogliarvi lo scoglio
123  ch'esser non lascia a voi Dio manifesto.”

121  What negligence, what standing still is this?
122  Run to the mountain to strip off the slough,
123  That lets not God be manifest to you."

124  Come quando, cogliendo biado o loglio,
125  li colombi adunati a la pastura,
126  queti, sanza mostrar l'usato orgoglio,

124  Even as when, collecting grain or tares,
125  The doves, together at their pasture met,
126  Quiet, nor showing their accustomed pride,

127  se cosa appare ond' elli abbian paura,
128  subitamente lasciano star l'esca,
129  perch' assaliti son da maggior cura;

127  If aught appear of which they are afraid,
128  Upon a sudden leave their food alone,
129  Because they are assailed by greater care;

130  così vid' io quella masnada fresca
131  lasciar lo canto, e fuggir ver' la costa,
132  com' om che va, né sa dove rïesca;

130  So that fresh company did I behold
131  The song relinquish, and go tow'rds the hill,
132  As one who goes, and knows not whitherward;

133  né la nostra partita fu men tosta.

133  Nor was our own departure less in haste.

Purgatorio: Canto III
We've now traversed 36 cantos of the poem, and so many times we have been presented with this same paradox, which is, how can a spirit interact with a body.  Sometimes, as in the last canto, the attempt at interaction is a failure.  Dante cannot hug Casella.  And yet, so many times previously, Virgil, a shade, is able to pick up and move the physical Dante.  Is Dante just a lazy and inconsistent poet?  No.  And as Dante sees his own shadow before him, and not Virgil's, he panics, thinking he is alone.  (See also, Eliot's The Wasteland: And I will show you something different from either / Your shadow at morning striding behind you / Or your shadow at evening rising to meet you / I will show you fear in a handful of dust ... )  In a Jungian sense, what Dante, the aspirant is seeing is not his soul, his spirit, but his shade, his Jungian shadow, the projection of all the limitations of incarnation and physicality, when the light is behind him, and he sees it.  He sees it!  And he is alarmed.  Not at his shadow, but upon the absence of shadow from Virgil.  Now Virgil launches into his explanation, an explanation that now begins to make sense of all those paradoxical times throughout the Commedia in which spirits are intermingling with living substance.  What we have here is the mystery of Incarnation, the mystery of the holy trinity.  How in the cosmos is spirit able to animate flesh?  That mystery is absolute nonsense to one whose perspective is entirely derived from the needs of the flesh and the Freudian ego, but from the point of view of that spirit which infuses and animates everything, it is simply the outward expression naturally occurring as its love expands, and just as naturally occurring as its attention contracts.  I know it's weird to use the word "natural" to describe what is usually thought to be beyond nature, but it is no weirder than having a pagan explain the operations of the Trinity to a Christian, the mechanism, that is to say, the metaphor, is the same.  When we try to reconcile the spirit and body with reason, that is to say, the brain or mind, they never mix, and their irreconcilability remains a constant thorn in our side.  But in the heart — in the emotional body — their paired existences are not mutually exclusive, but interpenetrating, and the realization of such is bliss, the bliss of God, in Dante's terminology.  Mind in its pride wants to know and is frustrated by its own limitations.  But the heart beats, it is simple being, it is.  There is no conundrum, only existence, only a pluse, which sets the world around it into the flow of some substance through some other substance.  This flow is what we might call, taking Dante's point of view if not his words: The flow of blessings through bliss.  This acceptance of the flow is the fruit of humility, and remains inaccessible to pride.  A baby can live what a sage cannot know.  Now, realizing this as readers helps us to make sense of how we should be reading this poem, and why poems about arms and the man or about human love remain fixed as being flows around them.  The Commedia, qua spiritual speech, is showing us the new way, the new person, and here in Purgatory we are beginning to shed those layers and layers of barnacled misconceptions which have hindered us.  Here we are growing lighter and more transparent.  We are beginning to recognize that our physical body is light, transparency, and bliss, through and through.  

Note the difference at the end of Virgil's discourse, that his head drops, as sadness overtakes him.  Outwardly, this is an attitude of prayer, but only outwardly.  What he is feeling is grief for himself that he has come so close to salvation ... and yet, a miss is a good as a mile.  He looks, down, after, while Dante looks up, and it is Dante's looking up, which gives the pair their first clue as to how to scale the cliffs and make their wary.  Compare this with Virgil's insistence that Dante kneel at the sheer awesomeness of the Angel pilot in the previous canto.  This kind of kneeling and bowing is true reverence, and the true attitude of prayer.  And to repeat what was said above: this kind of reverence in the presence of revelation is the body's natural response to a confrontation with its own non-physical essence.  That is to say, the attitude of a grateful submissive and servant.  We are all, as Muslims would have it, effendi, i.e. the slaves of God, all subject to the great operations of the cosmos.  It behooves us to ask here: What are we submitting ourselves to?  My answer would be: the force and flow of life from moment to moment as it animates matter.  Even a minute in such a state is more fulfilling than a lifetime of anxiety about sex, money, power, approbation ... et al.  A hard sell, I know, to anyone who has never felt that flow ... but to those who have felt it ... a truism.  

There is some interplay here about shadows, only Dante, being physical has one, and Dante, and Virgil, in a kind of fit of nostalgia talks about his own body, and its shadow.  I know it's weirdly anachronistic to talk about Jung's concept of the shadow in a poem written centuries before Jung was born.  But there is a simultaneity of all history in the mind, which, like the broken rock cliff that the protagonist cannot climb without wings (this passage up, a mirror image to the broken passage down to the ninth circle of Hell) is an impassable jumble.  The geologic strata of the mind is always like this, a record of constant upheaval, the detritus of memory constantly being heaped and jumbled by the unending welter of all those desires which the body and society foment, and which, like what we find here, is saturated in a kind of time that seems both anxious and excruciatingly slow, a feature that the text emphasizes both by the dash that ends the previous canto and the sight that the protagonists see here: the slow-moving line of pilgrims, which like the horizon, stays always as distant no matter how far we've come to reach it.  What's the antidote to this dilemma?  Dante gives a hint when he talks about the hurry that mars the dignity of every action.  (See the etymology of dignity and disdain, the first from a word meaning "worth", the second from one meaning "unworthy" ... again, substance and shadow.)  Opposites are at play in other instances too.  The Time is different in other places, and the throng of pilgrim to the left of the protagonists, turn them around, and move them to the right, a direction opposite from that which they followed as they corkscrewed down into Hell.  Is Dante pointing out this relationship that the play of opposites always entails, and not just opposites which are inimical to one another, but those like the opposable thumb and the rest of our hands, which complement and enable one another.  Such seems to be the case here between the living and the dead, as Manfred asks Dante to remind his living associates to pray for him, as their living breath, quite different here than the requests or disdain of the shades in Hell in their quest for fame or oblivion, can influence his fate in the afterworld.  Again, we have opposites.  In this case the continued vanity of those in Hell, concerned about their reputations, and the utter humility of Manfred, here in Purgatory, who humbly needs someone still involved in the hurly-burly of life still has some concern, some love for him.  This must be so.  That is, the communication between the spirit and the body is two-way, and just as Beatrice from her abode in non-physical bliss is concerned for the still-living Dante, so we, yet inhabiting a body, elevate both ourselves and our deceased loved ones by opening this channel of concern, which flows between us and connects us.  

1  Avvegna che la subitana fuga
2  dispergesse color per la campagna,
3  rivolti al monte ove ragion ne fruga,
1  Inasmuch as the instantaneous flight
2  Had scattered them asunder o'er the plain,
3  Turned to the mountain whither reason spurs us,
4  i' mi ristrinsi a la fida compagna:
5  e come sare' io sanza lui corso?
6  chi m'avria tratto su per la montagna?
4  I pressed me close unto my faithful comrade,
5  And how without him had I kept my course?
6  Who would have led me up along the mountain?
7  El mi parea da sé stesso rimorso:
8  o dignitosa coscïenza e netta,
9  come t'è picciol fallo amaro morso!

7  He seemed to me within himself remorseful;
8  O noble conscience, and without a stain,
9  How sharp a sting is trivial fault to thee!
10  Quando li piedi suoi lasciar la fretta,
11  che l'onestade ad ogn' atto dismaga,
12  la mente mia, che prima era ristretta, 
10  After his feet had laid aside the haste
11  Which mars the dignity of every act,
12  My mind, that hitherto had been restrained,
13  lo 'ntento rallargò, sì come vaga,
14  e diedi 'l viso mio incontr' al poggio
15  che 'nverso 'l ciel più alto si dislaga.
13  Let loose its faculties as if delighted,
14  And I my sight directed to the hill
15  That highest tow'rds the heaven uplifts itself.
16  Lo sol, che dietro fiammeggiava roggio,
17  rotto m'era dinanzi a la figura,
18  ch'avëa in me de' suoi raggi l'appoggio.
16  The sun, that in our rear was flaming red,
17  Was broken in front of me into the figure
18  Which had in me the stoppage of its rays;
19  Io mi volsi dallato con paura
20  d'essere abbandonato, quand' io vidi
21  solo dinanzi a me la terra oscura;
19  Unto one side I turned me, with the fear
20  Of being left alone, when I beheld
21  Only in front of me the ground obscured.

22  e 'l mio conforto: “Perché pur diffidi?”
23  a dir mi cominciò tutto rivolto;
24  “non credi tu me teco e ch'io ti guidi?
22  "Why dost thou still mistrust?" my Comforter
23  Began to say to me turned wholly round;
24  "Dost thou not think me with thee, and that I guide thee?
25  Vespero è già colà dov' è sepolto
26  lo corpo dentro al quale io facea ombra;
27  Napoli l'ha, e da Brandizio è tolto.
25  'Tis evening there already where is buried
26  The body within which I cast a shadow;
27  'Tis from Brundusium ta'en, and Naples has it.
28  Ora, se innanzi a me nulla s'aombra,
29  non ti maravigliar più che d'i cieli
30  che l'uno a l'altro raggio non ingombra. 
28  Now if in front of me no shadow fall,
29  Marvel not at it more than at the heavens,
30  Because one ray impedeth not another
31  A sofferir tormenti, caldi e geli
32  simili corpi la Virtù dispone
33  che, come fa, non vuol ch'a noi si sveli.

31  To suffer torments, both of cold and heat,
32  Bodies like this that Power provides, which wills
33  That how it works be not unveiled to us.

34  Matto è chi spera che nostra ragione
35  possa trascorrer la infinita via
36  che tiene una sustanza in tre persone.

34  Insane is he who hopeth that our reason
35  Can traverse the illimitable way,
36  Which the one Substance in three Persons follows!

37  State contenti, umana gente, al quia;
38  ché, se potuto aveste veder tutto,
39  mestier non era parturir Maria;

37  Mortals, remain contented at the 'Quia;'
38  For if ye had been able to see all,
39  No need there were for Mary to give birth;

40  e disïar vedeste sanza frutto
41  tai che sarebbe lor disio quetato,
42  ch'etternalmente è dato lor per lutto:

40  And ye have seen desiring without fruit,
41  Those whose desire would have been quieted,
42  Which evermore is given them for a grief.

43  io dico d'Aristotile e di Plato
44  e di molt' altri”; e qui chinò la fronte,
45  e più non disse, e rimase turbato.
43  I speak of Aristotle and of Plato,
44  And many others;"—and here bowed his head,
45  And more he said not, and remained disturbed.
46  Noi divenimmo intanto a piè del monte;
47  quivi trovammo la roccia sì erta,
48  che 'ndarno vi sarien le gambe pronte.
46  We came meanwhile unto the mountain's foot;
47  There so precipitate we found the rock,
48  That nimble legs would there have been in vain.
49  Tra Lerice e Turbìa la più diserta,
50  la più rotta ruina è una scala,
51 verso di quella, agevole e aperta. 
49  'Twixt Lerici and Turbia, the most desert,
50  The most secluded pathway is a stair
51  Easy and open, if compared with that.
52  “Or chi sa da qual man la costa cala,”
53  disse 'l maestro mio fermando 'l passo,
54 “sì che possa salir chi va sanz' ala?”
52  "Who knoweth now upon which hand the hill
53  Slopes down," my Master said, his footsteps staying,
54  "So that who goeth without wings may mount?"
55  E mentre ch'e' tenendo 'l viso basso
56  essaminava del cammin la mente,
57  e io mirava suso intorno al sasso,
55  And while he held his eyes upon the ground
56  Examining the nature of the path,
57  And I was looking up around the rock,
58  da man sinistra m'apparì una gente
59  d'anime, che movieno i piè ver' noi,
60  e non pareva, sì venïan lente.
58  On the left hand appeared to me a throng
59  Of souls, that moved their feet in our direction,
60  And did not seem to move, they came so slowly.
61  “Leva,” diss' io, “maestro, li occhi tuoi:
62  ecco di qua chi ne darà consiglio,
63  se tu da te medesmo aver nol puoi.”
61  "Lift up thine eyes," I to the Master said;
62  "Behold, on this side, who will give us counsel,
63  If thou of thine own self can have it not."
64  Guardò allora, e con libero piglio
65  rispuose: “Andiamo in là, ch'ei vegnon piano;
66  e tu ferma la spene, dolce figlio.”
64  Then he looked at me, and with frank expression
65  Replied: "Let us go there, for they come slowly,
66  And thou be steadfast in thy hope, sweet son."
67  Ancora era quel popol di lontano,
68  i' dico dopo i nostri mille passi,
69  quanto un buon gittator trarria con mano,
67  Still was that people as far off from us,
68  After a thousand steps of ours I say,
69  As a good thrower with his hand would reach,
70  quando si strinser tutti ai duri massi
71  de l'alta ripa, e stetter fermi e stretti
72  com' a guardar, chi va dubbiando, stassi.
70  When they all crowded unto the hard masses
71  Of the high bank, and motionless stood and close,
72  As he stands still to look who goes in doubt.
73  “O ben finiti, o già spiriti eletti,”
74  Virgilio incominciò, “per quella pace
75  ch'i' credo che per voi tutti s'aspetti,
73  "O happy dead! O spirits elect already!"
74  Virgilius made beginning, "by that peace
75  Which I believe is waiting for you all,
76  ditene dove la montagna giace,
77  sì che possibil sia l'andare in suso;
78  ché perder tempo a chi più sa più spiace.”
76  Tell us upon what side the mountain slopes,
77  So that the going up be possible,
78  For to lose time irks him most who most knows."
79  Come le pecorelle escon del chiuso
80  a una, a due, a tre, e l'altre stanno
81  timidette atterrando l'occhio e 'l muso;
79  As sheep come issuing forth from out the fold
80  By ones and twos and threes, and the others stand
81  Timidly, holding down their eyes and nostrils,
82  e ciò che fa la prima, e l'altre fanno,
83  addossandosi a lei, s'ella s'arresta,
84  semplici e quete, e lo 'mperché non sanno:
82  And what the foremost does the others do,
83  Huddling themselves against her, if she stop,
84  Simple and quiet and the wherefore know not;
85  sì vid' io muovere a venir la testa
86  di quella mandra fortunata allotta,
87 pudica in faccia e ne l'andare onesta.
85  So moving to approach us thereupon
86  I saw the leader of that fortunate flock,
87  Modest in face and dignified in gait.
88  Come color dinanzi vider rotta
89  la luce in terra dal mio destro canto,
90  sì che l'ombra era da me a la grotta,
88  As soon as those in the advance saw broken
89  The light upon the ground at my right side,
90  So that from me the shadow reached the rock,
91  restaro, e trasser sé in dietro alquanto,
92  e tutti li altri che venieno appresso,
93  non sappiendo 'l perché, fenno altrettanto.
91  They stopped, and backward drew themselves somewhat;
92  And all the others, who came after them,
93  Not knowing why nor wherefore, did the same.
94  “Sanza vostra domanda io vi confesso
95  che questo è corpo uman che voi vedete;
96  per che 'l lume del sole in terra è fesso.
94  "Without your asking, I confess to you
95  This is a human body which you see,
96  Whereby the sunshine on the ground is cleft.
97  Non vi maravigliate, ma credete
98  che non sanza virtù che da ciel vegna
99  cerchi di soverchiar questa parete.”
97  Marvel ye not thereat, but be persuaded
98  That not without a power which comes from Heaven
99   Doth he endeavour to surmount this wall."
100  Così 'l maestro; e quella gente degna
101  “Tornate,” disse, “intrate innanzi dunque,”
102  coi dossi de la man faccendo insegna.
100  The Master thus; and said those worthy people:
101  "Return ye then, and enter in before us,"
102  Making a signal with the back o' the hand
103  E un di loro incominciò: “Chiunque
104  tu se', così andando, volgi 'l viso:
105  pon mente se di là mi vedesti unque.”
103  And one of them began: "Whoe'er thou art,
104  Thus going turn thine eyes, consider well
105  If e'er thou saw me in the other world."
106  Io mi volsi ver' lui e guardail fiso:
107  biondo era e bello e di gentile aspetto,
108  ma l'un de' cigli un colpo avea diviso.
106 I turned me tow'rds him, and looked at him closely;
107  Blond was he, beautiful, and of noble aspect,
108  But one of his eyebrows had a blow divided.
109  Quand' io mi fui umilmente disdetto
110  d'averlo visto mai, el disse: “Or vedi”;
111  e mostrommi una piaga a sommo 'l petto.
109  When with humility I had disclaimed
110  E'er having seen him, "Now behold!" he said,
111  And showed me high upon his breast a wound.
112  Poi sorridendo disse: “Io son Manfredi,
113  nepote di Costanza imperadrice;
114  ond' io ti priego che, quando tu riedi,
112  Then said he with a smile: "I am Manfredi,
113  The grandson of the Empress Costanza;
114  Therefore, when thou returnest, I beseech thee
115  vadi a mia bella figlia, genetrice
116  de l'onor di Cicilia e d'Aragona,
117  e dichi 'l vero a lei, s'altro si dice.
115  Go to my daughter beautiful, the mother
116  Of Sicily's honour and of Aragon's,
117  And the truth tell her, if aught else be told.
118  Poscia ch'io ebbi rotta la persona
119  di due punte mortali, io mi rendei,
120  piangendo, a quei che volontier perdona.
118  After I had my body lacerated
119  By these two mortal stabs, I gave myself
120  Weeping to Him, who willingly doth pardon.
121  Orribil furon li peccati miei;
122  ma la bontà infinita ha sì gran braccia,
123  che prende ciò che si rivolge a lei.
121  Horrible my iniquities had been;
122  But Infinite Goodness hath such ample arms,
123  That it receives whatever turns to it.
124  Se 'l pastor di Cosenza, che a la caccia
125  di me fu messo per Clemente allora,
126  avesse in Dio ben letta questa faccia,
124  Had but Cosenza's pastor, who in chase
125  Of me was sent by Clement at that time,
126  In God read understandingly this page,
127  l'ossa del corpo mio sarieno ancora
128  in co del ponte presso a Benevento,
129  sotto la guardia de la grave mora.
127  The bones of my dead body still would be
128  At the bridge-head, near unto Benevento,
129 Under the safeguard of the heavy cairn.
130  Or le bagna la pioggia e move il vento
131  di fuor dal regno, quasi lungo 'l Verde,
132  dov' e' le trasmutò a lume spento.
130  Now the rain bathes and moveth them the wind,
131  Beyond the realm, almost beside the Verde,
132  Where he transported them with tapers quenched.
133  Per lor maladizion sì non si perde,
134  che non possa tornar, l'etterno amore,
135  mentre che la speranza ha fior del verde.
133  By malison of theirs is not so lost
134  Eternal Love, that it cannot return,
135  So long as hope has anything of green.
136  Vero è che quale in contumacia more
137  di Santa Chiesa, ancor ch'al fin si penta,
138  star li convien da questa ripa in fore,
136  True is it, who in contumacy dies
137  Of Holy Church, though penitent at last,
138  Must wait upon the outside this bank
139  per ognun tempo ch'elli è stato, trenta,
140  in sua presunzïon, se tal decreto
141  più corto per buon prieghi non diventa.
139  Thirty times told the time that he has been
140  In his presumption, unless such decree
141  Shorter by means of righteous prayers become.
142  Vedi oggimai se tu mi puoi far lieto,
143  revelando a la mia buona Costanza
144  come m'hai visto, e anco esto divieto;
142  See now if thou hast power to make me happy,
143  By making known unto my good Costanza
144  How thou hast seen me, and this ban beside,
145 ché qui per quei di là molto s'avanza.”
145  For those on earth can much advance us here."
Purgatorio: Canto IV
Any absorption in the senses, Dante argues in the first 15 lines of this canto, impedes for us any perception of time.  The aspirant, in listening to Manfred in the previous canto, has dawdled for hours without any awareness of Time, and in doing so, he has absented himself from that power in the soul — some sort of background running "reason" — that somehow keeps track of everything which has transpired, including, and Dante makes this clear in all his references to Time, the activity of the celestial spheres.  Like the miraculous blending of the tripartite of Father (the transcendent), Son (the incarnate), and the Holy Ghost, the barycenter which constitutes the power which governs the relationship between the two.  These three would be the vegetative soul, governing physical growth, development and decay; the sensitive, governing the emotions, prodded into motion by the input of the senses; and the rational or intellective, which governs thought.  This last is not I think what can be meant by deductive or inductive reasoning, but something much more than that.  Let's call at the Akashic record keeper of all that is, has, or will transpire in the vegetative or the sensitive.  As odd as it may sound, this is the part of us beyond time, which enables us, from, as it were, a metaposition — such as we experience when we interpret dreams or poetry — to perceive the operations of the temporal.  Or, as Blake says: "Eternity is in love with the production of Time."  If we want to understand Time and the changes and creativity which can only unfold in Time, we have to do so as subjects beyond time's perpetual influence.  We have to center ourselves beyond those faculties of the vegetative physical body and our sensory and emotional enslavement to it, and view time, and with it, I think, chance, or what Dante has elsewhere called the machinations of "fortune," from a position of freedom outside those mutating influences.  Freedom, in Time, can only be experienced, when we are free from Time.  This, I think, cannot happen in Purgatory, because, as a place of learning, it must also be a place of change, and again and again, as we move up this mountain, which is primarily a metaphor for greater and wider perspectives, we are reminded of the teachings of Time and change.

These things require a subtle understanding and the very finest distinctions, a situation which the text makes clear by reference to the narrowness of the passage and the steepness of the way that the protagonists must traverse.  Getting from Time as an expanding volume to the narrow, straight way of our ordinary perception of it, is allegorized by the steep cliff that Dante and Virgil must climb to reach the first ledge where they might rest.  And we will remember too, how distorted time was at the end of the Inferno, and the narrow way finally out to the light of the Purgatorio.  As in the previous canto where the passage of sheep from the fold is the metaphor, so here too is a humble metaphor of a peasant stopping a small opening with a forkful of thorns.  Beyond the obvious reference to the Gospels and Christ's reference to the narrow way to salvation, the humble metaphor here perhaps is Dante's way of telling us, that for the overly-cultivated man, the return to the naivite of faith, requires a little basic peasant awareness, not common sense so much, as simply taking to hand what must be done, without too much questioning as to why it must be done, an observation made in the previous canto with that "quia", i.e., the acceptance rather than the questioning of what is.  One can also think of these narrow passageways as birth canals, dangerous, crushing tunnels which nevertheless lead to some kind of new birth, some hitherto impossible state of expansiveness.  We also have reference to feet and wings, the earthly and the heavenly, and we see how the aspirant's motivation becomes wings for his flagging and tired feet and breath, the hard climb made possible — if not yet easy — by his faith in this guide and by the promises his guide has made.  How are we to do this?  Perseverance: Keep going in spite of fatigue, and in spite of not knowing the way), and encouragement: Even when Virgil does not know the way, as he did in the Inferno, having passed that journey before, he knows that encouragement does not require certainty, but it too is an affirmation of faith.

This canto contains another rather complicated cosmology of the path of the sun through the Zodiac, and although confusing to the aspirant (and no doubt to every modern reader), nevertheless gives a clear indication of two things.  We must orient ourselves according to the heavens, and that the cosmos itself is a kind of wheel turning around Jerusalem.  If we think of a gyroscope inside of a clear globe we see that of the sun is following a path inside the globe, one hemisphere would be light, but beneath our feet, another hemisphere would be dark.  The center of the gyroscope, it's balancing point would be the mating of spirit with Earth's geography, that is to say, Jerusalem.  The sun's path in winter would be to the North, left, and in the summer, south, or right.  Dante, the aspirant is still turned around, not realizing that he is no longer and Hell or on Earth, and in a cleverly ironic assertion (lines 76 through 78), that he has never seen so clearly how dense he has been and is.  This is the first smile we've had as readers for a long time, and after all of the aspirant's references to his fatigue, and for his need to stop and rest, we are about to get another, broader one.  The mention of the twins, the bear, and Phaeton have in each case their own symbolical value, quite apart from celestial mechanics.  The twins remind us, among other things, that Dante the aspirant, is the counterpart of Dante the poet, in the diachronic premise of the poem.  The bear, in winter, hibernates, a question of sleeping, waiting, delay, things of which this canto is illustrative.  And of course Phaeton, the audacious spiritual failure, in contrast to Dante, the humble spiritual success.  We can leave it to each reader to decide if Dante's humility is genuine or not at this stage in his journey.  In this canto he does everything he can to show the aspirant's weaknesses, both mental and physical, but he also shows his strength, not the least of which is this ability to laugh at himself, as he perseveres in his quest.

The last section of this Canto is the meeting between the slothful Belacqua, who delayed repentance until the last moments of his life, and therefore must wait another lifetime in the Purgatory before he can proceed.  Note, at the beginning of this segment how Virgil's encouragement is a sugar coated promise, a far cry from some of the sharp corrections he uttered to his protege in many places in the Inferno.  We note too that the acquaintances that Dante meets in Purgatory, Casella, and now Belacqua, are people that he likes, or did like when they were alive, and he is happy here to be relieved of his grief for Belacqua, who is here among those who are saved, and who moreover still retains his sense of humor and irony.  Belacqua is to the protagonists' left, seated behind a rock, in that pose so beloved by Blake, of fatigue and defeat, squatted, head and hands between his knees.  The aspirant has to smile when he is exhorted by the personification of indolence to be alacritous in continuing his steep journey.  Night is coming on.  And the canto concludes with Virgil repeating admonishment of Belacqua for Dante to get a move on.  Morocco, home of the fleshpots of infidels is already tread upon by night, and the aspirant, not wanting also to be trapped here by darkness, gets the hint, and moves. 

What we want to take away from all this is that this canto is about Time and how Time operates celestially and spiritually, and how we make use of it or waste it.  It may be that Time waits for no one, but it is certainly a weight on everyone.  And the question becomes, in every instant, what is the best spiritual use of that instant.  But really, is what we are seeking chosen, or allowed?    
1  Quando per dilettanze o ver per doglie,
2  che alcuna virtù nostra comprenda,
3  l'anima bene ad essa si raccoglie, 
1  Whenever by delight or else by pain,
2  That seizes any faculty of ours,
3  Wholly to that the soul collects itself,
4  par ch'a nulla potenza più intenda;
5  e questo è contra quello error che crede
6  ch'un'anima sovr' altra in noi s'accenda.
4  It seemeth that no other power it heeds;
5  And this against that error is which thinks
6  One soul above another kindles in us.
7  E però, quando s'ode cosa o vede
8  che tegna forte a sé l'anima volta,
9  vassene 'l tempo e l'uom non se n'avvede;
7  And hence, whenever aught is heard or seen
8  Which keeps the soul intently bent upon it,
9  Time passes on, and we perceive it not,
10  ch'altra potenza è quella che l'ascolta,
11  e altra è quella c'ha l'anima intera:
12  questa è quasi legata e quella è sciolta.
10  Because one faculty is that which listens,
11  And other that which the soul keeps entire;
12  This is as if in bonds, and that is free.
13  Di ciò ebb' io esperïenza vera,
14  udendo quello spirto e ammirando;
15  ché ben cinquanta gradi salito era
13  Of this I had experience positive
14  In hearing and in gazing at that spirit;
15  For fifty full degrees uprisen was
16  lo sole, e io non m'era accorto, quando
17  venimmo ove quell' anime ad una
18  gridaro a noi: “Qui è vostro dimando.”
16  The sun, and I had not perceived it, when
17  We came to where those souls with one accord
18  Cried out unto us: "Here is what you ask."
19  Maggiore aperta molte volte impruna
20  con una forcatella di sue spine
21  l'uom de la villa quando l'uva imbruna,
19  A greater opening ofttimes hedges up
20  With but a little forkful of his thorns
21  The villager, what time the grape imbrowns,
22  che non era la calla onde salìne
23  lo duca mio, e io appresso, soli,
24  come da noi la schiera si partìne.
22  Than was the passage-way through which ascended
23  Only my Leader and myself behind him,
24  After that company departed from us.
25  Vassi in Sanleo e discendesi in Noli,
26  montasi su in Bismantova e' n Cacume
27  con esso i piè; ma qui convien ch'om voli;
25  One climbs Sanleo and descends in Noli,
26  And mounts the summit of Bismantova,
27  With feet alone; but here one needs must fly;
28  dico con l'ale snelle e con le piume
29  del gran disio, di retro a quel condotto
30  che speranza mi dava e facea lume.
28  With the swift pinions and the plumes I say
29  Of great desire, conducted after him
30  Who gave me hope, and made a light for me.
31  Noi salavam per entro 'l sasso rotto,
32  e d'ogne lato ne stringea lo stremo,
33  e piedi e man volea il suol di sotto.
31  We mounted upward through the rifted rock,
32  And on each side the border pressed upon us,
33  And feet and hands the ground beneath required.
34  Poi che noi fummo in su l'orlo suppremo
35  de l'alta ripa, a la scoperta piaggia,
36  “Maestro mio,” diss' io, “che via faremo?”
34  When we were come upon the upper rim
35  Of the high bank, out on the open slope,
36  "My Master," said I, "what way shall we take?"
37  Ed elli a me: “Nessun tuo passo caggia;
38  pur su al monte dietro a me acquista,
39  fin che n'appaia alcuna scorta saggia.”
37  And he to me: "No step of thine descend;
38  Still up the mount behind me win thy way,
39  Till some sage escort shall appear to us."
40  Lo sommo er' alto che vincea la vista,
41  e la costa superba più assai
42  che da mezzo quadrante a centro lista.
40  The summit was so high it vanquished sight,
41  And the hillside precipitous far more
42  Than line from middle quadrant to the centre.
43  Io era lasso, quando cominciai:
44  “O dolce padre, volgiti, e rimira
45  com' io rimango sol, se non restai.”
43  Spent with fatigue was I, when I began:
44  "O my sweet Father! turn thee and behold
45  How I remain alone, unless thou stay!"
46  “Figliuol mio,” disse, “infin quivi ti tira,”
47  additandomi un balzo poco in sùe
48  che da quel lato il poggio tutto gira.
46  "O son," he said, "up yonder drag thyself,"
47  Pointing me to a terrace somewhat higher,
48  Which on that side encircles all the hill.
49  Sì mi spronaron le parole sue,
50  ch'i' mi sforzai carpando appresso lui,
51  tanto che 'l cinghio sotto i piè mi fue.
49  These words of his so spurred me on, that I
50  Strained every nerve, behind him scrambling up,
51  Until the circle was beneath my feet.
52  A seder ci ponemmo ivi ambedui
53  vòlti a levante ond' eravam saliti,
54  che suole a riguardar giovare altrui.
52  Thereon ourselves we seated both of us
53  Turned to the East, from which we had ascended,
54  For all men are delighted to look back.
55  Li occhi prima drizzai ai bassi liti;
56  poscia li alzai al sole, e ammirava
57  che da sinistra n'eravam feriti.
55  To the low shores mine eyes I first directed,
56  Then to the sun uplifted them, and wondered
57  That on the left hand we were smitten by it.
58  Ben s'avvide il poeta ch'ïo stava
59  stupido tutto al carro de la luce,
60  ove tra noi e Aquilone intrava.

58  The Poet well perceived that I was wholly
59  Bewildered at the chariot of the light,
60  Where 'twixt us and the Aquilon it entered.

61  Ond' elli a me: “Se Castore e Poluce
62  fossero in compagnia di quello specchio
63  che sù e giù del suo lume conduce
61  Whereon he said to me: "If Castor and Pollux
62  Were in the company of yonder mirror,
63  That up and down conducteth with its light,
64  tu vedresti il Zodïaco rubecchio
65  ancora a l'Orse più stretto rotare,
66  se non uscisse fuor del cammin vecchio.

64  Thou wouldst behold the zodiac's jagged wheel
65  Revolving still more near unto the Bears,
66  Unless it swerved aside from its old track.

67  Come ciò sia, se 'l vuoi poter pensare,
68  dentro raccolto, imagina Sïòn
69  con questo monte in su la terra stare
67  How that may be wouldst thou have power to think,
68  Collected in thyself, imagine Zion
69  Together with this mount on earth to stand,
70  sì, ch'amendue hanno un solo orizzòn
71  e diversi emisperi; onde la strada
72  che mal non seppe carreggiar Fetòn,
70  So that they both one sole horizon have,
71  And hemispheres diverse; whereby the road
72  Which Phaeton, alas! knew not to drive,
73  vedrai come a costui convien che vada
74  da l'un, quando a colui da l'altro fianco,
75  se lo 'ntelletto tuo ben chiaro bada.”
73  Thou'lt see how of necessity must pass
74  This on one side, when that upon the other,
75   If thine intelligence right clearly heed."
76  “Certo, maestro mio,” diss' io, “unquanco
77  non vid' io chiaro sì com' io discerno
78  là dove mio ingegno parea manco,
76  "Truly, my Master," said I, "never yet
77  Saw I so clearly as I now discern,
78  There where my wit appeared incompetent,
79  che 'l mezzo cerchio del moto superno,
80  che si chiama Equatore in alcun' arte,
81  e che sempre riman tra 'l sole e 'l verno,
79  That the mid-circle of supernal motion,
80  Which in some art is the Equator called,
81  And aye remains between the Sun and Winter,
82  per la ragion che di', quinci si parte
83  verso settentrïon, quanto li Ebrei
84  vedevan lui verso la calda parte.
82  For reason which thou sayest, departeth hence
83  Tow'rds the Septentrion, what time the Hebrews
84  Beheld it tow'rds the region of the heat.
85  Ma se a te piace, volontier saprei
86  quanto avemo ad andar; ché 'l poggio sale
87  più che salir non posson li occhi miei.”
85  But, if it pleaseth thee, I fain would learn
86  How far we have to go; for the hill rises
87  Higher than eyes of mine have power to rise."
88  Ed elli a me: “Questa montagna è tale,
89  che sempre al cominciar di sotto è grave;
90  e quant' om più va sù, e men fa male.
88  And he to me: "This mount is such, that ever
89  At the beginning down below 'tis tiresome,
90  And aye the more one climbs, the less it hurts.
91  Però, quand' ella ti parrà soave
92  tanto, che sù andar ti fia leggero
93  com' a seconda giù andar per nave,
91  Therefore, when it shall seem so pleasant to thee,
92  That going up shall be to thee as easy
93  As going down the current in a boat,
94  allor sarai al fin d'esto sentiero;
95  quivi di riposar l'affanno aspetta.
96  Più non rispondo, e questo so per vero.”

94  Then at this pathway's ending thou wilt be;
95  There to repose thy panting breath expect;
96  No more I answer; and this I know for true."

97  E com' elli ebbe sua parola detta,
98  una voce di presso sonò: “Forse
99  che di sedere in pria avrai distretta!”
97  And as he finished uttering these words,
98  A voice close by us sounded: "Peradventure
99  Thou wilt have need of sitting down ere that."
100  Al suon di lei ciascun di noi si torse,
101  e vedemmo a mancina un gran petrone,
102  del qual né io né ei prima s'accorse.
100  At sound thereof each one of us turned round,
101  And saw upon the left hand a great rock,
102  Which neither I nor he before had noticed.
103  Là ci traemmo; e ivi eran persone
104  che si stavano a l'ombra dietro al sasso
105  come l'uom per negghienza a star si pone.
103  Thither we drew; and there were persons there
104  Who in the shadow stood behind the rock,
105  As one through indolence is wont to stand.
106  E un di lor, che mi sembiava lasso,
107  sedeva e abbracciava le ginocchia,
108  tenendo 'l viso giù tra esse basso.
106  And one of them, who seemed to me fatigued,
107  Was sitting down, and both his knees embraced,
108  Holding his face low down between them bowed.
109  “O dolce segnor mio,” diss' io, “adocchia
110  colui che mostra sé più negligente
111  che se pigrizia fosse sua serocchia.”
109  "O my sweet Lord," I said, "do turn thine eye
110  On him who shows himself more negligent
111  Then even Sloth herself his sister were."
112  Allor si volse a noi e puose mente,
113  movendo 'l viso pur su per la coscia,
114  e disse: “Or va tu sù, che se' valente!”
112  Then he turned round to us, and he gave heed,
113  Just lifting up his eyes above his thigh,
114  And said: "Now go thou up, for thou art valiant."
115  Conobbi allor chi era, e quella angoscia
116  che m'avacciava un poco ancor la lena,
117  non m'impedì l'andare a lui; e poscia

115  Then knew I who he was; and the distress,
116  That still a little did my breathing quicken,
117  My going to him hindered not; and after

118  ch'a lui fu' giunto, alzò la testa a pena,
119  dicendo: “Hai ben veduto come 'l sole
120  da l'omero sinistro il carro mena?”
118  I came to him he hardly raised his head,
119  Saying: "Hast thou seen clearly how the sun
120  'er thy left shoulder drives his chariot?"
121  Li atti suoi pigri e le corte parole
122  mosser le labbra mie un poco a riso;
123  poi cominciai: “Belacqua, a me non dole
121  His sluggish attitude and his curt words
122  A little unto laughter moved my lips;
123  Then I began: "Belacqua, I grieve not
124  di te omai; ma dimmi: perché assiso
125  quiritto se'? attendi tu iscorta,
126  o pur lo modo usato t'ha' ripriso?”
124  For thee henceforth; but tell me, wherefore seated
125  In this place art thou? Waitest thou an escort?
126  Or has thy usual habit seized upon thee?"
127  Ed elli: “O frate, andar in sù che porta?
128  ché non mi lascerebbe ire a' martìri
129  l'angel di Dio che siede in su la porta.
127  And he: "O brother, what's the use of climbing?
128  Since to my torment would not let me go
129  The Angel of God, who sitteth at the gate.
130  Prima convien che tanto il ciel m'aggiri
131  di fuor da essa, quanto fece in vita,
132  per ch'io 'ndugiai al fine i buon sospiri,
130  First heaven must needs so long revolve me round
131  Outside thereof, as in my life it did,
132  ince the good sighs I to the end postponed,
133  se orazïone in prima non m'aita
134  che surga sù di cuor che in grazia viva;
135  l'altra che val, che 'n ciel non è udita?”
133  Unless, e'er that, some prayer may bring me aid
134  Which rises from a heart that lives in grace;
135  What profit others that in heaven are heard not?"
136  E già il poeta innanzi mi saliva,
137  e dicea: “Vienne omai; vedi ch'è tocco
138  meridïan dal sole, e a la riva
136  Meanwhile the Poet was before me mounting,
137  And saying: "Come now; see the sun has touched
138  Meridian, and from the shore the night
139  cuopre la notte già col piè Morrocco.”

139  Covers already with her foot Morocco."

Purgatorio: Canto V
Distraction, diversion, miracle, spectacle, celebrity — what do these things have in common?  They are all obstacles on the spiritual path — they are all things which make their promises to a soul in need of escape, of rest, of a break from the crushing burden (as Schopenhauer might see it) and boredom of the ordinary.  The first part of Canto IV Purgatorio pulls us into a kind of mini-vortex of what the Buddhist's call near poisons, things that look like sources of genuine wonder, but which eventually turn their allures into hindrances on the path.  All through the Purgatorio Time has become more important, but not so much as a kind of medium in which change can take place, but as catastrophic of wastage, for every moment not spent in union with the whole is eventually a source of fragmentation, of separation, and above all things, the soul is a unifying force, and yet the entire Commedia keeps revolving around this capacity of soul — even or should we say particularly after the shedding of that body which blocks the light and casts a shadow, even in the anteroom of paradise — to delay its own progress.  Every step we take on the path is both a step up or a step down, a step toward or a step away from, a step toward unification and freedom or a step towards selfishness and bondage.  And what is the most precious commodity of the soul?  The body?  Well, all the souls we meet here in this Canto, have yet to come up with any other answer, either being obsessed with Dante as a corpus or with their own bodies that in this case were shed by acts of violence during their Earthly existence.  Virgil somehow knows this — which is a mystery in itself — and he knows too that there is a deadly difference between curiosity for unusual things, which is what the shades here are displaying when they see Dante's shade, and a compassionate search for authenticity.  The shades here have made of Dante a celebrity, he is the ordinary showing up in an extraordinary place, and blocking the light, because he distracts the souls from their purpose.  Instead of looking at Dante's shadow, they should have been looking at the source of light.  In a word, they are dawdlers, men and women, who put off or were by the circumstances of their lives, were delayed until the very last moment, from seeing their need for salvation, and what is even more astonishing, the alacrity with which Divine beings offer their compassion, even in the most disturbing circumstances.  Virgil breaks the aspirant's trance here, by the invocation of shame.  To be fascinated by one's own course, one's own uniqueness, celebrity, talent, notoriety, past accomplishments, and so forth, is to set up a kind of false idol, which takes us away from transcendence by sneaking a changeling soul into the place where the real soul should be.  And where is that?  In the shadow, in that physical substance and the ego's attachment to it, which blocks the light.  Note too that Dante's shadow falls to the left, the direction of the protagonists' progress through the Inferno.  Here, on the road to salvation, Dante, the aspirant, is doing the most ordinary of things: which is, as line 6 tells us: to conduct himself like one of the living, and it is this degraded state that makes him a wonder in this place, which is the very foundation of wonder.  I think Dante does an extraordinary thing here.  So many times on this journey, he has pointed out the astonishment of those souls in the afterlife who confront one conducting himself like one of the living, so many times, in fact, that the reader might be tempted into thinking that this trope has become a kind of cliché, a filler, that allows both the poet's and the reader's imagination to rest, even while reading, by making us think, 'nothing new here, I understand this perfectly.  But do we understand.  I think not.  Not a rest, but a goad, or an obstacle to our spiritual aspirations, and we don't need a miracle or a spectacle to understand this.  Virgil can simply deduce it by not acting like one who lives.  Virgil, a denizen, of that circle of Hell where the virtuous pagans are stuck in the unmoving tableau of their own fame, knows that the nature of the soul, is to move, and like Yeats, the poem, in so many instances, and also here, in Jacopo's death in a swamp and Buonconte's corpse in its journey to the sea, seems to be saying "What's water but the generated soul."   
The other major issue at stake here is one of relationship, the relationships that we forge or break in life, and the relationship that we have between those things that pertain to the mortal body, one's political position, one's power, one's wealth, and the relationship that we have with our soul, our thoughts about the departed, our marriage, our genuine spiritual work, our humility, or our compassion.  The only proper relationship of the any to any is one based up this connective tissue of compassion.  Pray for me.  I will pray for you.  Those are the foundation stones that unite disparate things and beings in a ring of mutual concern, and when we come to the simple story of Pia at the end, we need only be brought to the bare image of a stone set in a ring as the promise of betrothal and faithfulness, her greatest treasure, and the means used to betray her.
      
1  I had already from those shades departed,
2  And followed in the footsteps of my Guide,
3  When from behind, pointing his finger at me,

1  Io era già da quell' ombre partito,
2  e seguitava l'orme del mio duca,
3  quando di retro a me, drizzando 'l dito,

4  One shouted: "See, it seems as if shone not
5  The sunshine on the left of him below,
6  And like one living seems he to conduct him."

4  una gridò: “Ve' che non par che luca
5  lo raggio da sinistra a quel di sotto,
6  e come vivo par che si conduca!”

7  Mine eyes I turned at utterance of these words,
8  And saw them watching with astonishment
9  But me, but me, and the light which was broken!

7  Li occhi rivolsi al suon di questo motto,
8  e vidile guardar per maraviglia
9  pur me, pur me, e 'l lume ch'era rotto.

10  "Why doth thy mind so occupy itself,"
11  The Master said, "that thou thy pace dost slacken?
12  What matters it to thee what here is whispered?

10  “Perché l'animo tuo tanto s'impiglia,”
11  disse 'l maestro, “che l'andare allenti?
12  che ti fa ciò che quivi si pispiglia?

13  Come after me, and let the people talk;
14  Stand like a steadfast tower, that never wags
15  Its top for all the blowing of the winds;

13  Vien dietro a me, e lascia dir le genti:
14  sta come torre ferma, che non crolla
15  già mai la cima per soffiar di venti;

16  For evermore the man in whom is springing
17  Thought upon thought, removes from him the mark,
18  Because the force of one the other weakens."

16  ché sempre l'omo in cui pensier rampolla
17  sovra pensier, da sé dilunga il segno,
18  perché la foga l'un de l'altro insolla.”
19  What could I say in answer but "I come"?
20  I said it somewhat with that colour tinged
21  Which makes a man of pardon sometimes worthy.

19  Che potea io ridir, se non “Io vegno”?
20  Dissilo, alquanto del color consperso
21  che fa l'uom di perdon talvolta degno.

22  Meanwhile along the mountain-side across
23  Came people in advance of us a little,
24  Singing the Miserere verse by verse.

22  E 'ntanto per la costa di traverso
23  venivan genti innanzi a noi un poco,
24  cantando “Miserere” a verso a verso.

25  When they became aware I gave no place
26  For passage of the sunshine through my body,
27  They changed their song into a long, hoarse "Oh!"

25  Quando s'accorser ch'i' non dava loco
26  per lo mio corpo al trapassar d'i raggi,
27  mutar lor canto in un “oh!” lungo e roco;

28  And two of them, in form of messengers,
29  Ran forth to meet us, and demanded of us,
30  "Of your condition make us cognisant."

28  e due di loro, in forma di messaggi,
29  corsero incontr' a noi e dimandarne:
30  “Di vostra condizion fatene saggi.”

31  And said my Master: "Ye can go your way
32  And carry back again to those who sent you,
33  That this one's body is of very flesh.

31  E 'l mio maestro: “Voi potete andarne
32  e ritrarre a color che vi mandaro
33  che 'l corpo di costui è vera carne.

34  If they stood still because they saw his shadow,
35  As I suppose, enough is answered them;
36  Him let them honour, it may profit them."

34  Se per veder la sua ombra restaro,
35  com' io avviso, assai è lor risposto:
36  fàccianli onore, ed esser può lor caro.”

37  Vapours enkindled saw I ne'er so swiftly
38  At early nightfall cleave the air serene,
39  Nor, at the set of sun, the clouds of August,

37  Vapori accesi non vid' io sì tosto
38  di prima notte mai fender sereno,
39  né, sol calando, nuvole d'agosto,

40  But upward they returned in briefer time,
41  And, on arriving, with the others wheeled
42  Tow'rds us, like troops that run without a rein.

40  che color non tornasser suso in meno;
41  e, giunti là, con li altri a noi dier volta,
42  come schiera che scorre sanza freno.

43  "This folk that presses unto us is great,
44  And cometh to implore thee," said the Poet;
45  "So still go onward, and in going listen."

43  “Questa gente che preme a noi è molta,
44  e vegnonti a pregar,” disse 'l poeta:
45  “però pur va, e in andando ascolta.”

46  "O soul that goest to beatitude
47  With the same members wherewith thou wast born,"
48  Shouting they came, "a little stay thy steps,

46  “O anima che vai per esser lieta
47  con quelle membra con le quai nascesti,”
48  venian gridando, “un poco il passo queta.

49  Look, if thou e'er hast any of us seen,
50  So that o'er yonder thou bear news of him;
51  Ah, why dost thou go on? Ah, why not stay?

49  Guarda s'alcun di noi unqua vedesti,
50  sì che di lui di là novella porti:
51  deh, perché vai? deh, perché non t'arresti?

52  Long since we all were slain by violence,
53  And sinners even to the latest hour;
54  Then did a light from heaven admonish us,

52  Noi fummo tutti già per forza morti,
53  e peccatori infino a l'ultima ora;
54  quivi lume del ciel ne fece accorti,

55  So that, both penitent and pardoning, forth
56  From life we issued reconciled to God,
57  Who with desire to see Him stirs our hearts."

55  sì che, pentendo e perdonando, fora
56  di vita uscimmo a Dio pacificati,
57  che del disio di sé veder n'accora.”

58  And I: "Although I gaze into your faces,
59  No one I recognize; but if may please you
60  Aught I have power to do, ye well-born spirits,

58  E io: “Perché ne' vostri visi guati,
59  non riconosco alcun; ma s'a voi piace
60  cosa ch'io possa, spiriti ben nati

61  Speak ye, and I will do it, by that peace
62  Which, following the feet of such a Guide,
63  From world to world makes itself sought by me."

61  voi dite, e io farò per quella pace
62  che, dietro a' piedi di sì fatta guida,
63  di mondo in mondo cercar mi si face.”

64  And one began: "Each one has confidence
65  In thy good offices without an oath,
66  Unless the I cannot cut off the I will;

64  E uno incominciò: “Ciascun si fida
65  del beneficio tuo sanza giurarlo,
66  pur che 'l voler nonpossa non ricida.

67  Whence I, who speak alone before the others,
68  Pray thee, if ever thou dost see the land
69  That 'twixt Romagna lies and that of Charles,

67  Ond' io, che solo innanzi a li altri parlo,
68  ti priego, se mai vedi quel paese
69  che siede tra Romagna e quel di Carlo,

70  Thou be so courteous to me of thy prayers
71  In Fano, that they pray for me devoutly,
72  That I may purge away my grave offences.

70  che tu mi sie di tuoi prieghi cortese
71  in Fano, sì che ben per me s'adori
72  pur ch'i' possa purgar le gravi offese.

73  From thence was I; but the deep wounds, through which
74  Issued the blood wherein I had my seat,
75  Were dealt me in bosom of the Antenori,

73  Quindi fu' io; ma li profondi fóri
74  ond' uscì 'l sangue in sul quale io sedea,
75  fatti mi fuoro in grembo a li Antenori,

76  There where I thought to be the most secure;
77  'Twas he of Este had it done, who held me
78  In hatred far beyond what justice willed.

76  là dov' io più sicuro esser credea:
77  quel da Esti il fé far, che m'avea in ira
78  assai più là che dritto non volea.

79  But if towards the Mira I had fled,
80  When I was overtaken at Oriaco,
81  I still should be o'er yonder where men breathe.

79  Ma s'io fosse fuggito inver' la Mira,
80  quando fu' sovragiunto ad Orïaco,
81  ancor sarei di là dove si spira.

82  I ran to the lagoon, and reeds and mire
83  Did so entangle me I fell, and saw there
84  A lake made from my veins upon the ground."

82  Corsi al palude, e le cannucce e 'l braco
83  m'impigliar sì ch'i' caddi; e lì vid' io
84  de le mie vene farsi in terra laco.”

85  Then said another: "Ah, be that desire
86  Fulfilled that draws thee to the lofty mountain,
87  As thou with pious pity aidest mine.

85  Poi disse un altro: “Deh, se quel disio
86  si compia che ti tragge a l'alto monte,
87  con buona pïetate aiuta il mio!

88  I was of Montefeltro, and am Buonconte;
89  Giovanna, nor none other cares for me;
90  Hence among these I go with downcast front."

88  Io fui di Montefeltro, io son Bonconte;
89  Giovanna o altri non ha di me cura;
90  per ch'io vo tra costor con bassa fronte.”

91  And I to him: "What violence or what chance
92  Led thee astray so far from Campaldino,
93  That never has thy sepulture been known?"

91  E io a lui: “Qual forza o qual ventura
92  ti travïò sì fuor di Campaldino,
93  che non si seppe mai tua sepultura?”

94  "Oh," he replied, "at Casentino's foot
95  A river crosses named Archiano, born
96  Above the Hermitage in Apennine.

94  “Oh!” rispuos' elli, “a piè del Casentino
95  traversa un'acqua c'ha nome l'Archiano,
96  che sovra l'Ermo nasce in Apennino.

97  There where the name thereof becometh void
98  Did I arrive, pierced through and through the throat,
99  Fleeing on foot, and bloodying the plain;

97  Là 've 'l vocabol suo diventa vano,
98  arriva' io forato ne la gola,
99  fuggendo a piede e sanguinando il piano.

100  There my sight lost I, and my utterance
101  Ceased in the name of Mary, and thereat
102  I fell, and tenantless my flesh remained.

100  Quivi perdei la vista e la parola;
101  nel nome di Maria fini', e quivi
102  caddi, e rimase la mia carne sola.

103  Truth will I speak, repeat it to the living;
104  God's Angel took me up, and he of hell
105  Shouted: 'O thou from heaven, why dost thou rob me?

103  Io dirò vero, e tu 'l ridì tra ' vivi:
104  l'angel di Dio mi prese, e quel d'inferno
105  gridava: 'O tu del ciel, perché mi privi?

106  Thou bearest away the eternal part of him,
107  For one poor little tear, that takes him from me;
108  But with the rest I'll deal in other fashion!'

106  Tu te ne porti di costui l'etterno
107  per una lagrimetta che 'l mi toglie;
108  ma io farò de l'altro altro governo!'

109  Well knowest thou how in the air is gathered
110  That humid vapour which to water turns,
111  Soon as it rises where the cold doth grasp it.

109  Ben sai come ne l'aere si raccoglie
110  quell' umido vapor che in acqua riede,
111  tosto che sale dove 'l freddo il coglie.

112  He joined that evil will, which aye seeks evil,
113  To intellect, and moved the mist and wind
114  By means of power, which his own nature gave;

112  Giunse quel mal voler che pur mal chiede
113  con lo 'ntelletto, e mosse il fummo e 'l vento
114  per la virtù che sua natura diede.

115  Thereafter, when the day was spent, the valley
116  From Pratomagno to the great yoke covered
117  With fog, and made the heaven above intent,

115  Indi la valle, come 'l dì fu spento,
116  da Pratomagno al gran giogo coperse
117  di nebbia; e 'l ciel di sopra fece intento,

118  So that the pregnant air to water changed;
119  Down fell the rain, and to the gullies came
120  Whate'er of it earth tolerated not;

118  sì che 'l pregno aere in acqua si converse;
119  la pioggia cadde, e a' fossati venne
120  di lei ciò che la terra non sofferse;

121  And as it mingled with the mighty torrents,
122  Towards the royal river with such speed
123  It headlong rushed, that nothing held it back.

121  e come ai rivi grandi si convenne,
122  ver' lo fiume real tanto veloce
123  si ruinò, che nulla la ritenne.

124  My frozen body near unto its outlet
125  The robust Archian found, and into Arno
126  Thrust it, and loosened from my breast the cross

124  Lo corpo mio gelato in su la foce
125  trovò l'Archian rubesto; e quel sospinse
126  ne l'Arno, e sciolse al mio petto la croce

127  I made of me, when agony o'ercame me;
128  It rolled me on the banks and on the bottom,
129  Then with its booty covered and begirt me."

127  ch'i' fe' di me quando 'l dolor mi vinse;
128  voltòmmi per le ripe e per lo fondo,
129  poi di sua preda mi coperse e cinse.”

130  "Ah, when thou hast returned unto the world,
131  And rested thee from thy long journeying,"
132  After the second followed the third spirit,

130  “Deh, quando tu sarai tornato al mondo
132  e riposato de la lunga via,”
133  seguitò 'l terzo spirito al secondo,

133  "Do thou remember me who am the Pia;
134  Siena made me, unmade me Maremma;
135  He knoweth it, who had encircled first,

133  “ricorditi di me, che son la Pia;
134  Siena mi fé, disfecemi Maremma:
135  salsi colui che 'nnanellata pria

136  Espousing me, my finger with his gem."

136  disposando m'avea con la sua gemma.”

Purgatorio: Canto VI
Neither the grandeur nor the subtlety of Dante’s insight can really be experienced through excerpts.  The significance of the opening simile of Canto VI of the Purgatorio on chance cannot be fully grasped without comparing it to Virgil's exposition in Canto VII of the Inferno on Fortune.  In the Inferno Fortune is both entity - Lady Fortune - and object - a vertically mounted wheel.  The wheel metaphor is very much in keeping with Hell-consciousness.  It postulates a sense of inevitability, a fatefulness about mortal life.  You may be thriving now, but the wheel turns, and you suffer a penurious defeat.  In this metaphor Lady Fortune becomes God’s designate, and his omnipotence is not tarnished by foreknowledge of either your accomplishments or your defeats.  It all happens automatically, in a sense, then, one’s virtue or viciousness is irrelevant to our mortal condition.  How then could we be either elevated to transcendence or consigned to perdition on the basis of arbitrary processes beyond our control?  We get into a rather Bhagavad Gita moral mess here.  In the sense that action is volitional, but the fruits of action exist at another level of what Bateson called logical hierarchies.  One could write an entire book on this subject alone, and one could also say that The Divine Comedy is that book.  Virgil also uses a rather intriguing figure in the Inferno about how each aspect of the universe reflects all other aspects in its distribution of pleasure and pain, virtue and vice — the cosmos being a kind of fractalized jewel of many facets, or in another line, the workings of Lady Fortune are secret, like the presence of a snake in the grass.  This then is Virgil's explanation.  Is it credible?  Well, we have to consider that, because Virgil's fallibility is just exactly what the aspirant does question here.  But now let’s return to the dice-throw metaphor in Canto VI of the Purgatorio.  Dice games are numbers games with odds.  Sometimes you win, sometimes you lose, but it is not inevitable as it is with the wheel that down is followed by up, or that up precedes down.  Each throw's effect is undetermined, and neither the actions of the winner nor the loser have any bearing on the outcome.  This looks suspiciously like Grace, as an auspicious result is simply given, and merit has nothing to do with winning or losing. It is very telling that Dante depicts his loser lingering over his misfortune as though by recalculating his actions he might find the causes of his loss and a pathway to future victories.  And so now we find the real tragedy of the loser - in this case Virgil, who missed salvation by the accidental timing of his birth before the incarnation.  He does not understand the incredible complexity of the apparently random events which led to his defeat.  He does not understand that he is not the author of his own book or fate.  And 'though the circumstances stances which defeated him were beyond his control, he still has his pagan pride by thinking that they should have been. This world of the loser, is one of justice and it’s inevitable corollary, injustice.  Once we cross the waters of chaos to arrive at purgatory, the world of such dichotomies is behind us.  By grace, not by merit, we have already won.  If Dante had postulated this conflation of chance and grace a few centuries later, he might have met Bruno’s fate at the stake.  Finally, we learn from Singleton's commentary that in this dice game, the player's win or lose by predicting the outcome of their throw, before it is made, so there is an element of divination in the game, the winner a correct diviner of the future, the loser a false prophet so to speak.  We discern from this that the winner is more in alignment with the times — to put it in I Ching-like terms — or with God's will — to use a more medieval Christian trope.  So this too infuses the winner with a kind of supernatural glow as the favorite of Lady Fortune, in short, blessed by luck, which, as mentioned above, becomes a kind of synonym for grace.

After this opening salvo, what follows is the presentation of those who have died by violence but have had the good fortune of being granted time to repent or have an angel intervene on their behalf, and also the good fortune to have met a living person who might carry their requests for prayer back to the mortal world.  Here, and later when we meet Sordello, Virgil's fellow Mantuan, we have another portrait of what we may call the extended self, the geographic self, the linguistic self, the political or cultural self.  That this self, the body without organs, as Delueze might phrase it, is in violent termoil, is a central theme of Dante's throughout the poem.  It is a level of self wherein the internal fissures of the skin-encapsulated ego are writ large in the body politic.  When we read the back stories of those presented here, we find the most horrendous tales of internicine violence, and, political wars, clan disputes, murders that exceed all the proprieties of religion or law.  Italy, and by extention, Earth in mortal life, is a region of terror and violence, where not good Lady Fortune, but evil chance, rules.  Should we infer from this that it is only in the domain of spirit, or conscience, or imagination that we might find some solace or healing of these terrible rifts?  This is not a light question at all.  And why, if this is so, does the good will of those living in this mortal terror still have the capablility of assisting the progress of those who have escaped from it?  What exactly is it that allows those of flesh and blood this special power?  Virgil gives us a hint, in his rather tortured answer to Dante's questioning of this power of the living to assist those who have shuffled off their mortal coil.  It is because human beings in their mortal condition, in spite of their blindness and violence are capable of the "fire of love" (foco d'amor, line 38).  Then in a telling check on his own insight, Virgil advises Dante to not expect an answer from him, but to wait until he reaches Beatrice higher up the mountain in order to resolve himself of these doubts.  An interesting feature of the text here, has Dante refering to Virgil, even as he questions the older poet's veracity as "o luce mia", oh light of mine.  And this throws as back to Saint Lucy, at the very beginning of the Commedia.  Light/Love are the only solutions to the reckless and violent idiocy of the human predicament.  We should not be surprised here to find that the previously exhausted Dante is infused with more strength and fervor upon hearing Virgil's promise.  

We should add an aside here, concerning Dante's attitude towards his teacher, or towards authority, even when that authority is very often shown to be fallible.  That attitude is always one of veneration.  But it cannot be veneration of the "information" that he receives, because that information is not always correct or useful.  What is that veneration for then?  It must be a veneration for the relationship itself, the gift or experience to ignorance, flows only through a channel of love, trust, respect, and if we damage that pipeline so to speak, then all is lost, because the connection is fouled and broken.  This relationship is the real teaching, not the information, a truth that has become so clouded, indeed, entirely lost in many cases in contemporary society, that voracious appetite for information (without regard to its truth, usefulness, or beauty) completely occluding any attitude of love, trust, or respect, and delivered to us via machine.  Dante's world, even as it wallows in violence, betrayals, and superstition is still a human world because there remains in it the motivating power of love.

Now we come to the meeting with the poet Sordello, imperious at first, until he realizes that Virgil is a fellow Mantuan.  The two successfully embrace — an obvious foil to the failed embrace earlier between Dante and Casella, which brings us a positive example of the unity of that extended self referred to above.  The two are poets, the two are are fellow countrymen (in the geographic, not the politcal sense), the two, are in effect one, at that level of the self.  A condition that we should remember as we read, because the poem constantly invites us to enter into relationship with it, and Dante, at this level of the self.  That is, as readers of the poem, we become, as Borges has cleverly shown in some of his works, we become that larger self, sharing with Dante the same identity that has made this masterpiece, and which has the power to free us from mortality's terror, if we will relate to with that love, trust, and respect which is required for — not just or understanding — but of our shared poetic experience.

The conclusion of this Canto, and the most lengthy section, the part that modern reader is most likely to skip over because we do not see the history spoken of here as our history is all an invective against the condition of this extended self, in Dante's case, Italy, but by extension, the secular world.  It is a mad rush of mixed metaphors: Italy is a slave to tyrants.  Italy is a rudderless ship.  Italy is a riderless horse.  Italy is a garden laid waste.  Italy is a bereft widow.  Italy is a violent circus ruled by clowns.  And then we come to what seems to be so out of place here (a digression as Dante refers to it), and that is the long concluding passage entirely and venomously drenched with irony, about Dante's own homeland, Florence.  That irony and it's implied invective yet has a high seat in Dante's consciousness shows us that the poet still has a lot to learn about the love, trust, and respect that he so values in this domain of the extended self.  Here is one aspect of the self gnawing at another.  How can the mystical union of transcendence be achieved when this internal rancor still rages?  This is not a question which can be answered in the shadow of this anteroom of Purgatory.  And the aspirant Dante seems only to have a vague inkling of this.  Yet it is an inkling.  The last metaphor here is that of a sick woman (a kind of negative anima figure here, as Beatrice is a positive one, and as the brief portrait of Pia in the previous canto is a tragic one ), tossing and turning in pain on a bed of self-congratulatory luxury.  To me this image rhymes ominously to the condition of America (and much of the rest of the world), now: Winter, 2019.       

1  Whene'er is broken up the game of Zara,
2  He who has lost remains behind despondent,
3  The throws repeating, and in sadness learns;

1  Quando si parte il gioco de la zara,
2  colui che perde si riman dolente,
3  repetendo le volte, e tristo impara;

4  The people with the other all depart;
5  One goes in front, and one behind doth pluck him,
6  And at his side one brings himself to mind;

4  con l'altro se ne va tutta la gente;
5  qual va dinanzi, e qual di dietro il prende,
6  e qual dallato li si reca a mente;

7  He pauses not, and this and that one hears;
8  They crowd no more to whom his hand he stretches,
9  And from the throng he thus defends himself.

7  el non s'arresta, e questo e quello intende;
8  a cui porge la man, più non fa pressa;
9  e così da la calca si difende.

10  Even such was I in that dense multitude,
11  Turning to them this way and that my face,
12  And, promising, I freed myself therefrom.

10  Tal era io in quella turba spessa,
11  volgendo a loro, e qua e là, la faccia
12  e promettendo mi sciogliea da essa.

13  There was the Aretine, who from the arms
14  Untamed of Ghin di Tacco had his death,
15  And he who fleeing from pursuit was drowned.

13  Quiv' era l'Aretin che da le braccia
14  fiere di Ghin di Tacco ebbe la morte,
15  e l'altro ch'annegò correndo in caccia. 

16  There was imploring with his hands outstretched
17  Frederick Novello, and that one of Pisa
18  Who made the good Marzucco seem so strong.

16  Quivi pregava con le mani sporte
17  Federigo Novello, e quel da Pisa
18  che fé parer lo buon Marzucco forte.

19  I saw Count Orso; and the soul divided
20  By hatred and by envy from its body,
21  As it declared, and not for crime committed,

19  Vidi conte Orso e l'anima divisa
20  dal corpo suo per astio e per inveggia,
21  com' e' dicea, non per colpa commisa;

22  Pierre de la Brosse I say; and here provide
23  While still on earth the Lady of Brabant,
24  So that for this she be of no worse flock!

22  Pier da la Broccia dico; e qui proveggia,
23  mentr' è di qua, la donna di Brabante,
24  sì che però non sia di peggior greggia.

25  As soon as I was free from all those shades
26  Who only prayed that some one else may pray,
27  So as to hasten their becoming holy,

25  Come libero fui da tutte quante
26  quell' ombre che pregar pur ch'altri prieghi,
27  sì che s'avacci lor divenir sante,

28  Began I: "It appears that thou deniest,
29  O light of mine, expressly in some text,
30  That orison can bend decree of Heaven;

28  io cominciai: “El par che tu mi nieghi,
29  o luce mia, espresso in alcun testo
30  che decreto del cielo orazion pieghi;

31  And ne'ertheless these people pray for this.
32  Might then their expectation bootless be?
33  Or is to me thy saying not quite clear?"

31  e questa gente prega pur di questo:
32  sarebbe dunque loro speme vana,
33 o non m'è 'l detto tuo ben manifesto?”

34  And he to me: "My writing is explicit,
35  And not fallacious is the hope of these,
36  If with sane intellect 'tis well regarded;

34  Ed elli a me: “La mia scrittura è piana;
35  e la speranza di costor non falla,
36  se ben si guarda con la mente sana

37  For top of judgment doth not vail itself,
38  Because the fire of love fulfils at once
39  What he must satisfy who here installs him.

37  ché cima di giudicio non s'avvalla
38  perché foco d'amor compia in un punto
39  ciò che de' sodisfar chi qui s'astalla;

40  And there, where I affirmed that proposition,
41  Defect was not amended by a prayer,
42  Because the prayer from God was separate.

40  e là dov' io fermai cotesto punto,
41  non s'ammendava, per pregar, difetto,
42  perché 'l priego da Dio era disgiunto.

43  Verily, in so deep a questioning
44  Do not decide, unless she tell it thee,
45  Who light 'twixt truth and intellect shall be.

43  Veramente a così alto sospetto
44  non ti fermar, se quella nol ti dice
45 che lume fia tra 'l vero e lo 'ntelletto.

46  I know not if thou understand; I speak
47  Of Beatrice; her shalt thou see above,
48  Smiling and happy, on this mountain's top."

46  Non so se 'ntendi: io dico di Beatrice;
47   tu la vedrai di sopra, in su la vetta
48  di questo monte, ridere e felice.”

49  And I: "Good Leader, let us make more haste,
50  For I no longer tire me as before;
51  And see, e'en now the hill a shadow casts."

49  E io: “Segnore, andiamo a maggior fretta,
50  ché già non m'affatico come dianzi,
51 e vedi omai che 'l poggio l'ombra getta.”

52  "We will go forward with this day" he answered,
53  "As far as now is possible for us;
54  But otherwise the fact is than thou thinkest.

52  “Noi anderem con questo giorno innanzi,”
53  rispuose, “quanto più potremo omai;
54  ma 'l fatto è d'altra forma che non stanzi.

55  Ere thou art up there, thou shalt see return
56  Him, who now hides himself behind the hill,
57  So that thou dost not interrupt his rays.

55  Prima che sie là sù, tornar vedrai
56  colui che già si cuopre de la costa,
57  sì che ' suoi raggi tu romper non fai.

58  But yonder there behold! a soul that stationed
59  All, all alone is looking hitherward;
60  It will point out to us the quickest way."

58  Ma vedi là un'anima che, posta
59  sola soletta, inverso noi riguarda:
60  quella ne 'nsegnerà la via più tosta.”

61  We came up unto it; O Lombard soul,
62  How lofty and disdainful thou didst bear thee,
63  And grand and slow in moving of thine eyes!

61  Venimmo a lei: o anima lombarda,
62  come ti stavi altera e disdegnosa
63 e nel mover de li occhi onesta e tarda!

64  Nothing whatever did it say to us,
65  But let us go our way, eying us only
66  After the manner of a couchant lion;

64  Ella non ci dicëa alcuna cosa,
65 ma lasciavane gir, solo sguardando
66 a guisa di leon quando si posa.

67  Still near to it Virgilius drew, entreating
68  That it would point us out the best ascent;
69  And it replied not unto his demand,

67  Pur Virgilio si trasse a lei, pregando
68  che ne mostrasse la miglior salita;
69  e quella non rispuose al suo dimando,

70  But of our native land and of our life
71  It questioned us; and the sweet Guide began:
72  "Mantua,"—and the shade, all in itself recluse,

70  ma di nostro paese e de la vita
71  ci 'nchiese; e 'l dolce duca incominciava
72  “Mantüa ...,” e l'ombra, tutta in sé romita,

73  Rose tow'rds him from the place where first it was,
74  Saying: "O Mantuan, I am Sordello
75  Of thine own land!" and one embraced the other.

73  surse ver' lui del loco ove pria stava,
74  dicendo: “O Mantoano, io son Sordello
75  de la tua terra!”; e l'un l'altro abbracciava.

76  Ah! servile Italy, grief's hostelry!
77  A ship without a pilot in great tempest!
78  No Lady thou of Provinces, but brothel!

76  Ahi serva Italia, di dolore ostello,
77  nave sanza nocchiere in gran tempesta,
78  non donna di province, ma bordello!

79  That noble soul was so impatient, only
80  At the sweet sound of his own native land,
81  To make its citizen glad welcome there;

79  Quell' anima gentil fu così presta,
80  sol per lo dolce suon de la sua terra,
81  di fare al cittadin suo quivi festa;

82  And now within thee are not without war
83  Thy living ones, and one doth gnaw the other
84  Of those whom one wall and one fosse shut in!

82  e ora in te non stanno sanza guerra
83  li vivi tuoi, e l'un l'altro si rode
84  di quei ch'un muro e una fossa serra.

85  Search, wretched one, all round about the shores
86  Thy seaboard, and then look within thy bosom,
87  If any part of thee enjoyeth peace!

85  Cerca, misera, intorno da le prode
86  le tue marine, e poi ti guarda in seno,
87  s'alcuna parte in te di pace gode.

88  What boots it, that for thee Justinian
89  The bridle mend, if empty be the saddle?
90  Withouten this the shame would be the less.

88  Che val perché ti racconciasse il freno
89  Iustinïano, se la sella è vòta?
90  Sanz' esso fora la vergogna meno.

91  Ah! people, thou that oughtest to be devout,
92  And to let Caesar sit upon the saddle,
93  If well thou hearest what God teacheth thee,

91  Ahi gente che dovresti esser devota,
92  e lasciar seder Cesare in la sella,
93 se bene intendi ciò che Dio ti nota,

94  Behold how fell this wild beast has become,
95  Being no longer by the spur corrected,
96  Since thou hast laid thy hand upon the bridle.

94  guarda come esta fiera è fatta fella
95  per non esser corretta da li sproni,
96  poi che ponesti mano a la predella.
 
97  O German Albert! who abandonest
98  Her that has grown recalcitrant and savage,
99  And oughtest to bestride her saddle-bow,

97  O Alberto tedesco ch'abbandoni
98   costei ch'è fatta indomita e selvaggia,
99   e dovresti inforcar li suoi arcioni,

100  May a just judgment from the stars down fall
101  Upon thy blood, and be it new and open,
102  That thy successor may have fear thereof;

100  giusto giudicio da le stelle caggia
101  sovra 'l tuo sangue, e sia novo e aperto,
102  tal che 'l tuo successor temenza n'aggia!

103  Because thy father and thyself have suffered,
104  By greed of those transalpine lands distrained,
105  The garden of the empire to be waste.

103  Ch'avete tu e 'l tuo padre sofferto,
104  per cupidigia di costà distretti,
105  che 'l giardin de lo 'mperio sia diserto.

106  Come and behold Montecchi and Cappelletti,
107  Monaldi and Fillippeschi, careless man!
108  Those sad already, and these doubt-depressed!

106  Vieni a veder Montecchi e Cappelletti,
107  Monaldi e Filippeschi, uom sanza cura:
108  color già tristi, e questi con sospetti!

109  Come, cruel one! come and behold the oppression
110  Of thy nobility, and cure their wounds,
111  And thou shalt see how safe is Santafiore!

109  Vien, crudel, vieni, e vedi la pressura
110  d'i tuoi gentili, e cura lor magagne;
111  e vedrai Santafior com' è oscura!

112  Come and behold thy Rome, that is lamenting,
113  Widowed, alone, and day and night exclaims,
114  "My Caesar, why hast thou forsaken me?"

112  Vieni a veder la tua Roma che piagne
113  vedova e sola, e dì e notte chiama:
114  “Cesare mio, perché non m'accompagne?”

115  Come and behold how loving are the people;
116  And if for us no pity moveth thee,
117  Come and be made ashamed of thy renown!

115  Vieni a veder la gente quanto s'ama!
116  e se nulla di noi pietà ti move,
117  a vergognar ti vien de la tua fama.

118  And if it lawful be, O Jove Supreme!
119  Who upon earth for us wast crucified,
120  Are thy just eyes averted otherwhere?

118  E se licito m'è, o sommo Giove
119  che fosti in terra per noi crucifisso,
120  son li giusti occhi tuoi rivolti altrove?

121  Or preparation is 't, that, in the abyss
122  Of thine own counsel, for some good thou makest
123  From our perception utterly cut off?

121  O è preparazion che ne l'abisso
122  del tuo consiglio fai per alcun bene
123  in tutto de l'accorger nostro scisso?

124  For all the towns of Italy are full
125  Of tyrants, and becometh a Marcellus
126  Each peasant churl who plays the partisan!

124  Ché le città d'Italia tutte piene
125  son di tiranni, e un Marcel diventa
126  ogne villan che parteggiando viene.

127  My Florence! well mayst thou contented be
128  With this digression, which concerns thee not,
129  Thanks to thy people who such forethought take!

127  Fiorenza mia, ben puoi esser contenta
128  di questa digression che non ti tocca,
129  mercé del popol tuo che si argomenta.

130  Many at heart have justice, but shoot slowly,
131  That unadvised they come not to the bow,
132  But on their very lips thy people have it!

130  Molti han giustizia in cuore, e tardi scocca
131  per non venir sanza consiglio a l'arco;
132  ma il popol tuo l'ha in sommo de la bocca.

133  Many refuse to bear the common burden;
134  But thy solicitous people answereth
135 Without being asked, and crieth: "I submit."

133  Molti rifiutan lo comune incarco;
134  ma il popol tuo solicito risponde
135  sanza chiamare, e grida: “I' mi sobbarco!”

136  Now be thou joyful, for thou hast good reason;
137  Thou affluent, thou in peace, thou full of wisdom!
138  If I speak true, the event conceals it not.

136  Or ti fa lieta, ché tu hai ben onde:
137  tu ricca, tu con pace e tu con senno!
138  S'io dico 'l ver, l'effetto nol nasconde.

139  Athens and Lacedaemon, they who made
140  The ancient laws, and were so civilized,
141  Made towards living well a little sign

139  Atene e Lacedemona, che fenno
140  l'antiche leggi e furon sì civili,
141  fecero al viver bene un picciol cenno

142  Compared with thee, who makest such fine-spun
143  Provisions, that to middle of November
144  Reaches not what thou in October spinnest.

142  verso di te, che fai tanto sottili
144  provedimenti, ch'a mezzo novembre
144  non giugne quel che tu d'ottobre fili.

145  How oft, within the time of thy remembrance,
146  Laws, money, offices, and usages
147  Hast thou remodelled, and renewed thy members?

145  Quante volte, del tempo che rimembre,
146  legge, moneta, officio e costume
147  hai tu mutato, e rinovate membre!

148  And if thou mind thee well, and see the light,
149  Thou shalt behold thyself like a sick woman,
150  Who cannot find repose upon her down,

148  E se ben ti ricordi e vedi lume,
149  vedrai te somigliante a quella inferma
150  che non può trovar posa in su le piume,

151 But by her tossing wardeth off her pain.

151 ma con dar volta suo dolore scherma.

Canto VII
The essential issue in this canto seems to be Sordello's question — after his acceptance and embrace 3 and 4 times (7, if we're keeping track numerologically) — seems to be Voi, chi siete? — who are you?  Like Native Americans, we see from the text that before one has a name, one has a place, a people, a history, a language, and a destiny.  Again, throughout this canto we are presented with what I've been calling the extended self, from which one's destiny as a named or individualized separate self has emerged.  Sordello, although assuming Virgil has come from Hell, embraces him as an inferior embraces a person of higher rank and merit.1  Amazing.  Although Sordello is in Purgatory, and bound inevitably towards blessedness, and Virgil is mired in Hell, still Virgil's rank as a poet exalts him above the saved.  This gives us some idea of what importance Dante, the poet, assigns to poetry.  And yet, even the greatest poet cannot through his accomplishments as an artist be saved.  Curious, and instructive.  What follows this greeting is Virgil's apology, as he defines his own merits and deficiencies, the most interesting of which is his comparison of his own fate to that of an unbaptized infant, that is to say, to one innocent of individual sin, but condemned only by the original sin of mortality itself.  Does this mean that mortality itself is a kind of trauma to the undifferentiated bliss of the eternal?  A mighty question, not to be answered at the level of consciousness delimited by this level of Purgatory.  But, if we go back to the previous canto and the game of chance, it is chance that has placed Virgil among the damned, the accident of his birth, which brings us to another puzzle.  Is chance (grace or Fortune, if you prefer) also a part of this extended identity, another part like those listed above, which lie in some kind of limbo where the will, motivation, or the volitional have only a limited power in mortal life, being aspects of the Self that can be influenced perhaps, but not determined by one's personal actions, and must be given over to fate, for pagans, but to Divine will for the faithful.  Although it is outside the purview of the Commedia, it being a Christian poem, perhaps a Hindu would explain the attributes of these extended levels of the Self to karma, the results of actions in previous incarnations, which places one at the level not according to divine will or blind fate, but according to one's own state of consciousness in performing those actions.  This is not a question for literary scholars, but for the reader who sees the poem as a kind of map to follow to reach her or his own state of transcendence, certainly pertinent.

After these introductions, we then have a reversal of the hierarchy between Sordello, the subservient, and Virgil, the master.  Now Sordello becomes the master, the guide, and Virgil the chela.  It is as if Dante, the poet, (Dante the aspirant is completely absent from this canto for the first time in the poem, a silent witness, just as the reader has been all along.) cannot let a soul in anticipation of certain salvation remain in a subservient position to a pagan, 'though the pagan in question is his own guide.  There is a question of authority here, and what relationship authority has to those they ostensibly serve or who serve them.  What gives one authority, and what is the right attitude of those subject to authority towards those who possess it?  All through the poem, Dante, the poet, presents this relationship as being colored by a kind of medieval sense of courtesy, or what Chaucer, not much later, would often refer to as gentillesse, genteelness, a kind of refined sense of fidelity from both sides, which always is present even when the authority is mistaken or even pernicious and punishing.  Dante apparently sees this as a crucial part of the process of learning itself, a respect, not only of knowledge, but of the purveyor of knowledge, a very far cry from our current situation where information can be entirely divorce from any human attitude towards its font.  If knowledge, and especially if wisdom, is a kind of connective tissue which unites parts to the whole, then the quality of that transference must itself be an indespensible attribute of the process.  How could we possibly achieve any transcendence from our limited condition of ignorance if that connecting source is contrary or even absent? 

As we have seen throughout the Commedia, a great deal is made of positions in space, what’s above, what’s below, what’s left, what’s right, and just as we have read in the lines previous, there is a reversal of hierarchies again as three poets, powerless to control princes in mortal life, here, in the anteroom of Purgatory, are above them, in a metepysical sense, ascendant.  The poet's role as chroniclers is now the determining factor in the fate of any potentate's postmortem destiny.  There are 9 princes here viewed by 3 poets, which is no doubt of numerological significance, as the work is rife with Dante’s mania for numbers.  These nine sing the Salve Regina, another anima reference, and they have all died violently, sometimes at one another’s hands.  They could be said to represent a reconciliation of warring selves, either at the macro level of the state or the micro level of the individual.  They are huddled in the hollow of a landscape composed of what we might call astral or psychedelic colors and scents, a foretaste of what is to come in later cantos.  Night is falling, and in a curious and convoluted explanation, Sordello explains how darkness saps all motivation to move.  Could we interpret this to mean that at a certain stage of spiritual development one realizes the futility of action undertaken without the light of Divine inspiration? — a small but crucial bit of wisdom, which can only be perceived when becomes aware of and surrenders to the influence of a higher self. 
      
1  There is some doubt among commentators as to where exactly Sordello embraces Virgil.  My guess would be around the knees, since a little later Sardello is stooped low enough to draw a figure on the ground with his finger.
  
1  After the gracious and glad salutations
2  Had three and four times been reiterated,
3  Sordello backward drew and said, "Who are you?"

1  Poscia che l'accoglienze oneste e liete
2  furo iterate tre e quattro volte,
3  Sordel si trasse, e disse: “Voi, chi siete?”

4  "Or ever to this mountain were directed
5  The souls deserving to ascend to God,
6  My bones were buried by Octavian.

4  “Anzi che a questo monte fosser volte
5  l'anime degne di salire a Dio,
6  fur l'ossa mie per Ottavian sepolte.
7  I am Virgilius; and for no crime else
8  Did I lose heaven, than for not having faith;"
9  In this wise then my Leader made reply.
7  Io son Virgilio; e per null' altro rio
8  lo ciel perdei che per non aver fé.”
9  Così rispuose allora il duca mio.
10  As one who suddenly before him sees
11  Something whereat he marvels, who believes
12  And yet does not, saying, "It is! it is not!"
10  Qual è colui che cosa innanzi sé
11  sùbita vede ond' e' si maraviglia,
12  che crede e non, dicendo “Ella è... non è..,”
13  So he appeared; and then bowed down his brow,
14  And with humility returned towards him,
15  And, where inferiors embrace, embraced him.
13  tal parve quelli; e poi chinò le ciglia,
14  e umilmente ritornò ver' lui,
15  e abbracciòl là 've 'l minor s'appiglia.
16  "O glory of the Latians, thou," he said,
17  "Through whom our language showed what it could do
18  O pride eternal of the place I came from,
16  “O gloria di Latin,” disse, “per cui
17  mostrò ciò che potea la lingua nostra,
18  o pregio etterno del loco ond' io fui,
19  What merit or what grace to me reveals thee?
20  If I to hear thy words be worthy, tell me
21  If thou dost come from Hell, and from what cloister.
19  qual merito o qual grazia mi ti mostra?
20  S'io son d'udir le tue parole degno,
21  dimmi se vien d'inferno, e di qual chiostra.”
22  "Through all the circles of the doleful realm,"
23   Responded he, "have I come hitherward;
24   Heaven's power impelled me, and with that I come.
22  “Per tutt' i cerchi del dolente regno,”
23  rispuose lui, “son io di qua venuto;
24  virtù del ciel mi mosse, e con lei vegno.
25  I by not doing, not by doing, lost
26  The sight of that high sun which thou desirest,
27  And which too late by me was recognized.
25  Non per far, ma per non fare ho perduto
26  a veder l'alto Sol che tu disiri
27  e che fu tardi per me conosciuto.
28  A place there is below not sad with torments,
29  But darkness only, where the lamentations
30  Have not the sound of wailing, but are sighs.
28  Luogo è là giù non tristo di martìri,
29  ma di tenebre solo, ove i lamenti
30  non suonan come guai, ma son sospiri.
31  There dwell I with the little innocents
32  Snatched by the teeth of Death, or ever they
33  Were from our human sinfulness exempt.
31  Quivi sto io coi pargoli innocenti
32  dai denti morsi de la morte avante
33  che fosser da l'umana colpa essenti;
34  There dwell I among those who the three saintly
35  Virtues did not put on, and without vice
36  The others knew and followed all of them.
34  quivi sto io con quei che le tre sante
35  virtù non si vestiro, e sanza vizio
36  conobber l'altre e seguir tutte quante.
37  But if thou know and can, some indication
38  Give us by which we may the sooner come
39  Where Purgatory has its right beginning."
37  Ma se tu sai e puoi, alcuno indizio
38  dà noi per che venir possiam più tosto
39  là dove purgatorio ha dritto inizio.”
40  He answered: "No fixed place has been assigned us;
41  'Tis lawful for me to go up and round;
42  So far as I can go, as guide I join thee.
40  Rispuose: “Loco certo non c'è posto;
41  licito m'è andar suso e intorno;
42  per quanto ir posso, a guida mi t'accosto.
43  But see already how the day declines,
44  And to go up by night we are not able;
45  Therefore 'tis well to think of some fair sojourn.
43  Ma vedi già come dichina il giorno,
44  e andar sù di notte non si puote;
45  però è buon pensar di bel soggiorno.
46  Souls are there on the right hand here withdrawn;
47  If thou permit me I will lead thee to them,
48  And thou shalt know them not without delight."
46  Anime sono a destra qua remote;
47  se mi consenti, io ti merrò ad esse,
48  e non sanza diletto ti fier note.”
49  "How is this?" was the answer; "should one wish
50  To mount by night would he prevented be
51  By others? or mayhap would not have power?"
49  “Com' è ciò?” fu risposto.“Che volesse
50  salir di notte, fora elli impedito
51  d'altrui, o non sarria ché non potesse?”
52And on the ground the good Sordello drew
53  His finger, saying, "See, this line alone
54  Thou couldst not pass after the sun is gone;
52  E 'l buon Sordello in terra fregò 'l dito,
53  dicendo: “Vedi? sola questa riga
54  non varcheresti dopo 'l sol partito:
55  Not that aught else would hindrance give, however,
56  To going up, save the nocturnal darkness;
57  This with the want of power the will perplexes.
55  non però ch'altra cosa desse briga,
56  che la notturna tenebra, ad ir suso;
57  quella col nonpoder la voglia intriga.
58  We might indeed therewith return below,
59  And, wandering, walk the hill-side round about,
60  While the horizon holds the day imprisoned."
58  Ben si poria con lei tornare in giuso
59  e passeggiar la costa intorno errando,
60  mentre che l'orizzonte il dì tien chiuso.”
61  Thereon my Lord, as if in wonder, said:
62  "Do thou conduct us thither, where thou sayest
63  That we can take delight in tarrying."
61  Allora il mio segnor, quasi ammirando,
62  “Menane,” disse, “dunque là 've dici
63  ch'aver si può diletto dimorando.”
64  Little had we withdrawn us from that place,
65  When I perceived the mount was hollowed out
66  In fashion as the valleys here are hollowed.
64  Poco allungati c'eravam di lici,
65  quand' io m'accorsi che 'l monte era scemo,
66  a guisa che i vallon li sceman quici.
67  "Thitherward," said that shade, "will we repair,
68  Where of itself the hill-side makes a lap,
69  And there for the new day will we await."
67  “Colà,” disse quell' ombra, “n'anderemo
68  dove la costa face di sé grembo;
69  e là il novo giorno attenderemo.”
70  'Twixt hill and plain there was a winding path
71  Which led us to the margin of that dell,
72  Where dies the border more than half away.
70  Tra erto e piano era un sentiero schembo,
71  che ne condusse in fianco de la lacca,
72  là dove più ch'a mezzo muore il lembo.
73  Gold and fine silver, and scarlet and pearl-white,
74  The Indian wood resplendent and serene,
75  Fresh emerald the moment it is broken,
73  Oro e argento fine, cocco e biacca,
74  indaco, legno lucido e sereno,
75  fresco smeraldo in l'ora che si fiacca,
76  By herbage and by flowers within that hollow
77  Planted, each one in colour would be vanquished,
78  As by its greater vanquished is the less.
76  da l'erba e da li fior, dentr' a quel seno
77  posti, ciascun saria di color vinto,
78  come dal suo maggiore è vinto il meno.
79  Nor in that place had nature painted only,
80  But of the sweetness of a thousand odours
81  Made there a mingled fragrance and unknown.
79  Non avea pur natura ivi dipinto,
80  ma di soavità di mille odori
81  vi facea uno incognito e indistinto.
82  "Salve Regina," on the green and flowers
83  There seated, singing, spirits I beheld,
84  Which were not visible outside the valley.
82  “Salve, Regina” in sul verde e 'n su' fiori
83  quindi seder cantando anime vidi,
84  che per la valle non parean di fuori.
85  "Before the scanty sun now seeks his nest,"
86  Began the Mantuan who had led us thither,
87  "Among them do not wish me to conduct you.
85  “Prima che 'l poco sole omai s'annidi,”
86  cominciò 'l Mantoan che ci avea vòlti,
87  “tra color non vogliate ch'io vi guidi.
88  Better from off this ledge the acts and faces
89  Of all of them will you discriminate,
90  Than in the plain below received among them.
88  Di questo balzo meglio li atti e ' volti
89  conoscerete voi di tutti quanti,
90  che ne la lama giù tra essi accolti.
91  He who sits highest, and the semblance bears
92  Of having what he should have done neglected,
93  And to the others' song moves not his lips,
91  Colui che più siede alto e fa sembianti
92  d'aver negletto ciò che far dovea,
93  e che non move bocca a li altrui canti,
94  Rudolph the Emperor was, who had the power
95  To heal the wounds that Italy have slain,
96  So that through others slowly she revives.
94  Rodolfo imperador fu, che potea
95  sanar le piaghe c'hanno Italia morta,
96  sì che tardi per altri si ricrea.
97  The other, who in look doth comfort him,
98  Governed the region where the water springs,
99  The Moldau bears the Elbe, and Elbe the sea.
97  L'altro che ne la vista lui conforta,
98  resse la terra dove l'acqua nasce
99  che Molta in Albia, e Albia in mar ne porta:
100  His name was Ottocar; and in swaddling-clothes
102  Far better he than bearded Winceslaus
103  His son, who feeds in luxury and ease.
100  Ottacchero ebbe nome, e ne le fasce
101  fu meglio assai che Vincislao suo figlio
102  barbuto, cui lussuria e ozio pasce.
105  And the small-nosed, who close in council seems
106  With him that has an aspect so benign,
107  Died fleeing and disflowering the lily;
103  E quel nasetto che stretto a consiglio
104  par con colui c'ha sì benigno aspetto,
105  morì fuggendo e disfiorando il giglio:
106  Look there, how he is beating at his breast!
107  Behold the other one, who for his cheek
108  Sighing has made of his own palm a bed;
106  guardate là come si batte il petto!
107  L'altro vedete c'ha fatto a la guancia
108  de la sua palma, sospirando, letto.
109  Father and father-in-law of France's Pest
110  Are they, and know his vicious life and lewd,
111  And hence proceeds the grief that so doth pierce them.
109  Padre e suocero son del mal di Francia:
110  sanno la vita sua viziata e lorda,
111  e quindi viene il duol che sì li lancia.
112  He who appears so stalwart, and chimes in,
113  Singing, with that one of the manly nose,
114  The cord of every valour wore begirt;
112  Quel che par sì membruto e che s'accorda,
113  cantando, con colui dal maschio naso,
114  d'ogne valor portò cinta la corda;
115  And if as King had after him remained
116  The stripling who in rear of him is sitting,
117  Well had the valour passed from vase to vase,
115  e se re dopo lui fosse rimaso
116  lo giovanetto che retro a lui siede,
117  ben andava il valor di vaso in vaso,
118  Which cannot of the other heirs be said.
119  Frederick and Jacomo possess the realms,
120  But none the better heritage possesses.
118  che non si puote dir de l'altre rede;
119  Iacomo e Federigo hanno i reami;
120  del retaggio miglior nessun possiede.
121  Not oftentimes upriseth through the branches
122  The probity of man; and this He wills
123  Who gives it, so that we may ask of Him.
121  Rade volte risurge per li rami
122  l'umana probitate; e questo vole
123  quei che la dà, perché da lui si chiami.
124  Eke to the large-nosed reach my words, no less
125  Than to the other, Pier, who with him sings;
126  Whence Provence and Apulia grieve already
124  Anche al nasuto vanno mie parole
125  non men ch'a l'altro, Pier, che con lui canta,
130  onde Puglia e Proenza già si dole.
127  The plant is as inferior to its seed,
128  As more than Beatrice and Margaret
129  Costanza boasteth of her husband still.
127  Tant' è del seme suo minor la pianta,
128  quanto, più che Beatrice e Margherita,
129  Costanza di marito ancor si vanta.
130  Behold the monarch of the simple life,
131  Harry of England, sitting there alone;
132  He in his branches has a better issue.
130  Vedete il re de la semplice vita
131  seder là solo, Arrigo d'Inghilterra:
132  questi ha ne' rami suoi migliore uscita.
133  He who the lowest on the ground among them
134  Sits looking upward, is the Marquis William,
135  For whose sake Alessandria and her war
133  Quel che più basso tra costor s'atterra,
134  guardando in suso, è Guiglielmo marchese,
135  per cui e Alessandria e la sua guerra
136  Make Monferrat and Canavese weep."
136  fa pianger Monferrato e Canavese.”
Canto VIII
In this canto, we are going down, literally, down into the hollow where this group of penitents are huddled, going down into darkness, going down into chilling fear again with the reappearance of the serpent, going down into the farewells of sea and land voyages, going down towards sleep, going down from motion to stillness, going down to elemental forms, the green world of the protecting angels and the self-involved world of that most primitive of forms — recalling such things as DNA, blood vessels, cilia, maggots, the strands that make and unmake us, i.e., the cold worm which licks itself, sheds its skin, becomes new, but also is forever bringing back to our most primitive or physical origins, the enemy of the Blake's rose, the invisible worm which flies through the night, and cankers beauty and love.

The opening verses are full of nostalgia, the nostalgia ultimately of those who are departing not just physical life, for these first cantos of the Purgatorio are still very much about death, the circumstances of death, and the tussle of giving up the body and submitting oneself to the unknown, but when we come to verses 7 - 18 that nostalgia is quelled by an ecstasy that cannot be divided, as nostalgia always is because one feels the pull of the past dragging one back from the present, and blocking out all thought of the future.  A strange, unnamed figure arises, which might be identified as Dante's own soul, calling him back from his own nostalgia to his supreme purpose in embarking on this journey.  If we recall how many times throughout the Inferno that the aspirant, Dante, groped forward, unable to see, but having his ears assaulted, his hearing serving as his chief learning sense, here we have in him a temporary deafness, as he watches the figure signal him, and then assume the attitude of prayer.  Here is one whose entire thought is on God alone.  And when this figure begins to sing, Dante is drawn out of himself and into ecstasy.  The other figures, whom the three poets have descended to join, follow suit, all turning towards the east, the place of new beginnings, and singing the Tu lucis ante, joining the mysterious one, in unison devoutly singing this Compline prayer.  What do we do when we are tortured by grief, or fear, or sickness, or hopelessness?  What do we do when we feel exiled from whatever we had come to take for granted, to feel that we have loved, and in the case for the souls we meet throughout the Commedia, when we are losing the very thing that we had come to believe was ourselves, our physical life, our bodies ... we seek refuge, we seek comfort, we seek sleep, and forgetfulness ... the very opposite of the things that we have so vehemently sought to maintain, develop, and call our own ... but what is there that we can call our own?   Nothing.  Nothing at all.  There is nothing that we can possess or control, and at some point we are left with only with a longing, a longing for home.  Yet that home cannot be the home of our bodies, our families, our countries, our beliefs, our art, or even our spiritual practices.  The souls in this valley, violent men, important men, just men who have met unjust fates, have all discovered this colossal truth, the truth that Dante, the poet, turns aside to remind us of in lines 19 - 21, when he tells us that it is at these very times in which the veil which separates us from all that we have loved or hated, feared or desired, is most thin, most thin at those very times when we are huddled down in a night when the serpent-self is abroad, that is to say, our cynicism, our selfishness, our grandest delusions, and our most harrowing nightmares.  It is at this moment — which we would have given anything to avoid — it is at this the very moment when our deliverance is nearest.  Here the guardian angels rise, armed with swords, but not swords of violence, for the tips are broken.  No, these are swords of assurance.  They take up their posts, their bodies streaming with all that is green and budding, spring and promise, rising right out of the deepest dark, and, coming from Mary's womb (grembo, not "bosom" as has been often translated.)   And isn't it easy to imagine the singers crouched down in a fetal position as innocent as fetuses, when they are taken back in their ecstasy to  the sea, the mother, the female whose endless embrace is mercy, the mother/lover whom all of these souls address, confident that it is their very need that draws her grace to them.  And they sing to her, of her, calling her messengers forth, finally faithful, as they perhaps never were when they were full of the life of themselves, and absorbed in devotion.  Then when the serpent appears, they have no attention left to squander on all of the ruin that he represents, for they are far gone from his power over them, and however exalted they might have been in their positions during life, here they are even more exalted by their humility.  All this gets so quietly and beautifully expressed in the poetry, and if we recite it, listen closely to our voices caressing these sounds 

37  “Ambo vegnon del grembo di Maria,”
38  disse Sordello, “a guardia de la valle,
39  per lo serpente che verrà vie via.”
we might begin to feel just how thin that veil has become between ourselves and Dante, and we might see that this grand figure of a poet is never grander then at these moments when he shows himself as frightened and as awed as a child ... and in this very moment, just as Sordello and Judge Nino do, we are astonished that such a body, such a person could have ever been alive, real, historic, and subject to the very blows of Nature that we are.  And what is more astonishing yet is that our attention is drawn up to the three torches in heaven, that supernal wheel of brilliant stars, which pierce the darkness and promise even more than we have already received.  But note, too, that it is at this point, when looking up at the stars, the serpent intrudes.
The domestic drama of Judge Nino is then played out as a kind of starlit vestige of what was dearest to him (and us), but from which all memory is already fading.  Nino's wife has already forgotten him, gone on to another, and he begs that when Dante returns to the land of the living, that his 9 year-old daughter, Giovanna should be reminded to pray for him.  The last shade encountered is that of Currendo, whose family the aspirant praises as an examplar of how the powerful should behave themselves, and notably his praise embarasses its object.
 Ah, there is so much numerology included in this canto.  The three poets, the nine shades, the nine year old Giovanna (recalling the age of Beatrice when Dante first saw her), the four stars becoming three, the seven days in Aries, so that we feel that there remains an underlying significance to these proportions, something skeletal and basic, a potential that might manifest the richest creations, the most roiling emotions, and yet remain ever bright, and eerily free of all the troubles that beset us in our journey towards transcendence.  Truly, just as the first lines of the canto foretell, this is the hour which turns back desire, and raises our exiled poverty to gaze upon the stars.  
1  'Twas now the hour that turneth back desire
2  In those who sail the sea, and melts the heart,
3  The day they've said to their sweet friends farewell,
1  Era già l'ora che volge il disio
2  ai navicanti e 'ntenerisce il core
3  lo dì c'han detto ai dolci amici addio; 
4  And the new pilgrim penetrates with love,
5  If he doth hear from far away a bell
6  That seemeth to deplore the dying day,
4  e che lo novo peregrin d'amore
5  punge, se ode squilla di lontano
6 che paia il giorno pianger che si more;
7  When I began to make of no avail
8  My hearing, and to watch one of the souls
9  Uprisen, that begged attention with its hand.
7  quand' io incominciai a render vano
8  l'udire e a mirare una de l'alme
9  surta, che l'ascoltar chiedea con mano.
10  It joined and lifted upward both its palms,
11  Fixing its eyes upon the orient,
12  As if it said to God, "Naught else I care for."
10  Ella giunse e levò ambo le palme,
11  ficcando li occhi verso l'orïente,
12  come dicesse a Dio: “D'altro non calme.”
13  "Te lucis ante" so devoutly issued
14  Forth from its mouth, and with such dulcet notes,
15  It made me issue forth from my own mind.
13  “Te lucis ante” sì devotamente
14  le uscìo di bocca e con sì dolci note,
15  che fece me a me uscir di mente;
16  And then the others, sweetly and devoutly,
17  Accompanied it through all the hymn entire,
18  Having their eyes on the supernal wheels.
16  e l'altre poi dolcemente e devote
17  seguitar lei per tutto l'inno intero,
18  avendo li occhi a le superne rote.
19  Here, Reader, fix thine eyes well on the truth,
20  For now indeed so subtile is the veil,
21  Surely to penetrate within is easy.
19  Aguzza qui, lettor, ben li occhi al vero,
20  ché 'l velo è ora ben tanto sottile,
21  certo che 'l trapassar dentro è leggero.
22  I saw that army of the gentle-born
23  Thereafterward in silence upward gaze,
24  As if in expectation, pale and humble;
22  Io vidi quello essercito gentile
23  tacito poscia riguardare in sùe,
24  quasi aspettando, palido e umìle;
25  And from on high come forth and down descend,
26  I saw two Angels with two flaming swords,
27  Truncated and deprived of their points.
25  e vidi uscir de l'alto e scender giùe
26  due angeli con due spade affocate,
27  tronche e private de le punte sue.
28  Green as the little leaflets just now born
29  Their garments were, which, by their verdant pinions
30  Beaten and blown abroad, they trailed behind.
28  Verdi come fogliette pur mo nate
29  erano in veste, che da verdi penne
30  percosse traean dietro e ventilate.
31  One just above us came to take his station,
32  And one descended to the opposite bank,
33  So that the people were contained between them.
31  L'un poco sovra noi a star si venne,
32  e l'altro scese in l'opposita sponda,
33  sì che la gente in mezzo si contenne.
34  Clearly in them discerned I the blond head;
35  But in their faces was the eye bewildered,
36  As faculty confounded by excess.
34  Ben discernëa in lor la testa bionda;
35  ma ne la faccia l'occhio si smarria,
36  come virtù ch'a troppo si confonda
37  "From Mary's bosom both of them have come,"
38  Sordello said, "as guardians of the valley
39  Against the serpent, that will come anon."
37  “Ambo vegnon del grembo di Maria,”
38  disse Sordello, “a guardia de la valle,
39  per lo serpente che verrà vie via.”
40  Whereupon I, who knew not by what road,
41  Turned round about, and closely drew myself,
42  Utterly frozen, to the faithful shoulders.
40  Ond' io, che non sapeva per qual calle,
41  mi volsi intorno, e stretto m'accostai,
42  tutto gelato, a le fidate spalle.
43  And once again Sordello: "Now descend we
44  'Mid the grand shades, and we will speak to them;
45  Right pleasant will it be for them to see you."
43  E Sordello anco: “Or avvalliamo omai
44  tra le grandi ombre, e parleremo ad esse;
45  grazïoso fia lor vedervi assai.”
46  Only three steps I think that I descended,
47  And was below, and saw one who was looking
48  Only at me, as if he fain would know me.
46  Solo tre passi credo ch'i' scendesse,
47  e fui di sotto, e vidi un che mirava
48  pur me, come conoscer mi volesse.
49  Already now the air was growing dark,
50  But not so that between his eyes and mine
51  It did not show what it before locked up.
49  Temp' era già che l'aere s'annerava,
50  ma non sì che tra li occhi suoi e ' miei
51  non dichiarisse ciò che pria serrava.
52  Tow'rds me he moved, and I tow'rds him did move;
53  Noble Judge Nino! how it me delighted,
54  When I beheld thee not among the damned!
52  Ver' me si fece, e io ver' lui mi fei:
53  giudice Nin gentil, quanto mi piacque
54  quando ti vidi non esser tra ' rei!
55  No greeting fair was left unsaid between us;
56  Then asked he: "How long is it since thou camest
57  O'er the far waters to the mountain's foot?"
55  Nullo bel salutar tra noi si tacque;
56  poi dimandò: “Quant' è che tu venisti
57  a piè del monte per le lontane acque?”
58  "Oh!" said I to him, "through the dismal places
59  I came this morn; and am in the first life,
60  Albeit the other, going thus, I gain."
58  “Oh!” diss' io lui, “per entro i luoghi tristi
59  venni stamane, e sono in prima vita,
60  ancor che l'altra, sì andando, acquisti.”
61  And on the instant my reply was heard,
62  He and Sordello both shrank back from me,
63  Like people who are suddenly bewildered.
61  E come fu la mia risposta udita,
62  Sordello ed elli in dietro si raccolse
63  come gente di sùbito smarrita. 
64  One to Virgilius, and the other turned
65  To one who sat there, crying, "Up, Currado!
66  Come and behold what God in grace has willed!"
64  L'uno a Virgilio e l'altro a un si volse
65  che sedea lì, gridando: “Sù, Currado!
66  vieni a veder che Dio per grazia volse.”
67  Then, turned to me: "By that especial grace
68  Thou owest unto Him, who so conceals
69  His own first wherefore, that it has no ford,
67  Poi, vòlto a me: “Per quel singular grado
68  che tu dei a colui che sì nasconde
69  lo suo primo perché, che non lì è guado,
70  When thou shalt be beyond the waters wide,
71  Tell my Giovanna that she pray for me,
72  Where answer to the innocent is made.
70  quando sarai di là da le larghe onde,
71  dì a Giovanna mia che per me chiami
72  là dove a li 'nnocenti si risponde.
73  I do not think her mother loves me more,
74  Since she has laid aside her wimple white,
75  Which she, unhappy, needs must wish again.
73  Non credo che la sua madre più m'ami,
74  poscia che trasmutò le bianche bende,
75  le quai convien che, misera!, ancor brami.
76  Through her full easily is comprehended
77  How long in woman lasts the fire of love,
78  If eye or touch do not relight it often.
76  Per lei assai di lieve si comprende
77  quanto in femmina foco d'amor dura,
78  se l'occhio o 'l tatto spesso non l'accende.
79  So fair a hatchment will not make for her
80  The Viper marshalling the Milanese
81  A-field, as would have made Gallura's Cock."
79  Non le farà sì bella sepultura
80  la vipera che Melanesi accampa,
81  com' avria fatto il gallo di Gallura.”
82  In this wise spake he, with the stamp impressed
83  Upon his aspect of that righteous zeal
84  Which measurably burneth in the heart.
82  Così dicea, segnato de la stampa,
83  nel suo aspetto, di quel dritto zelo
84 che misuratamente in core avvampa.
85  My greedy eyes still wandered up to heaven,
86  Still to that point where slowest are the stars,
87  Even as a wheel the nearest to its axle.
85  Li occhi miei ghiotti andavan pur al cielo,
86  pur là dove le stelle son più tarde,
87  sì come rota più presso a lo stelo.
88  And my Conductor: "Son, what dost thou gaze at
89  Up there?" And I to him: "At those three torches
90  With which this hither pole is all on fire."
88  E 'l duca mio: “Figliuol, che là sù guarde?”
89  E io a lui: “A quelle tre facelle
90  di che 'l polo di qua tutto quanto arde.” 
91  And he to me: "The four resplendent stars
92  Thou sawest this morning are down yonder low,
93  And these have mounted up to where those were."
91  ond' elli a me: “Le quattro chiare stelle
92  che vedevi staman, son di là basse,
93  e queste son salite ov' eran quelle.”
94  As he was speaking, to himself Sordello
95  Drew him, and said, "Lo there our Adversary!"
96  And pointed with his finger to look thither.
94  Com' ei parlava, e Sordello a sé il trasse
95  dicendo: “Vedi là 'l nostro avversaro”;
96  e drizzò il dito perché 'n là guardasse.
97  Upon the side on which the little valley
98  No barrier hath, a serpent was; perchance
99  The same which gave to Eve the bitter food.
97  Da quella parte onde non ha riparo
98  la picciola vallea, era una biscia,
99  forse qual diede ad Eva il cibo amaro.
100  'Twixt grass and flowers came on the evil streak,
101  Turning at times its head about, and licking
102  Its back like to a beast that smoothes itself.
100  Tra l'erba e ' fior venìa la mala striscia,
101  volgendo ad ora ad or la testa, e 'l dosso
102  leccando come bestia che si liscia.
103  I did not see, and therefore cannot say
104  How the celestial falcons 'gan to move,
105  But well I saw that they were both in motion.
103  Io non vidi, e però dicer non posso,
104  come mosser li astor celestïali;
105  ma vidi bene e l'uno e l'altro mosso.
106  Hearing the air cleft by their verdant wings,
107  The serpent fled, and round the Angels wheeled,
108  Up to their stations flying back alike.
106  Sentendo fender l'aere a le verdi ali,
107  fuggì 'l serpente, e li angeli dier volta,
108  suso a le poste rivolando iguali.
109  The shade that to the Judge had near approached
110  When he had called, throughout that whole assault
111  Had not a moment loosed its gaze on me.
109  L'ombra che s'era al giudice raccolta
110  quando chiamò, per tutto quello assalto
111  punto non fu da me guardare sciolta.
112  "So may the light that leadeth thee on high
113  Find in thine own free-will as much of wax
114  As needful is up to the highest azure,"
112  “Se la lucerna che ti mena in alto
113  truovi nel tuo arbitrio tanta cera
114  quant' è mestiere infino al sommo smalto,”
115  Began it, "if some true intelligence
116  Of Valdimagra or its neighbourhood
117  Thou knowest, tell it me, who once was great there.
115  cominciò ella, “se novella vera
116  di Val di Magra o di parte vicina
117  sai, dillo a me, che già grande là era.
118  Currado Malaspina was I called;
119  I'm not the elder, but from him descended;
120  To mine I bore the love which here refineth."
118  Fui chiamato Currado Malaspina;
119  non son l'antico, ma di lui discesi;
120  a' miei portai l'amor che qui raffina.”
121  "O," said I unto him, "through your domains
122   I never passed, but where is there a dwelling
123  Throughout all Europe, where they are not known?
121  “Oh!” diss' io lui, “per li vostri paesi
122  già mai non fui; ma dove si dimora
123  per tutta Europa ch'ei non sien palesi?
124  That fame, which doeth honour to your house,
125  Proclaims its Signors and proclaims its land,
126  So that he knows of them who ne'er was there.
124  La fama che la vostra casa onora,
125  grida i segnori e grida la contrada,
126  sì che ne sa chi non vi fu ancora;
127  And, as I hope for heaven, I swear to you
128  Your honoured family in naught abates
129  The glory of the purse and of the sword.
127  e io vi giuro, s'io di sopra vada,
128  che vostra gente onrata non si sfregia
129  del pregio de la borsa e de la spada.
130  It is so privileged by use and nature,
131  That though a guilty head misguide the world,
132  Sole it goes right, and scorns the evil way."
130  Uso e natura sì la privilegia,
131  che, perché il capo reo il mondo torca,
132  sola va dritta e 'l mal cammin dispregia.”
133  And he: "Now go; for the sun shall not lie
134  Seven times upon the pillow which the Ram
135  With all his four feet covers and bestrides,
133  Ed elli: “Or va; che 'l sol non si ricorca
134  sette volte nel letto che 'l Montone
135  con tutti e quattro i piè cuopre e inforca,
136  Before that such a courteous opinion
137  Shall in the middle of thy head be nailed
138  With greater nails than of another's speech,
136  che cotesta cortese oppinïone
137  ti fia chiavata in mezzo de la testa
138  con maggior chiovi che d'altrui sermone,
139  Unless the course of justice standeth still."
139  se corso di giudicio non s'arresta.”
Canto IX
Can ordinary language suggest the level of complexity which the language of mathematics purports to attain?  Is there something about poetry that can elevate consciousness and awaken it to the true depths of the cosmos and of its own nature?  If the answer to any of these questions is yes, then we can attribute those affirmatives to passages such as these we find in Canto IX of Dante's Purgatorio.  Volumes of commentary through centuries of in-depth scholarship still fall short of explaining the sort of mythological-metaphoric condensation that this poetry achieves, and I can hardly hope to do more than suggest how the text manifests such luminance, elegance, seeming simplicity, and eloquence by means of this condensation.  Let's start with the question of Time.  What Time is it?  That seems a simple enough question, but it took almost seven hundred years before any student of the poem could determine the answer based un the text we are given.  It is early evening, just before moonrise, but that hardly answeres the question.  Consider the interweaving of myths used to suggest this.

Tithonus was a mortal who so infatuated the Goddess Aurora that she asked Zues to give him immortality, a boon granted, but since she neglected to also ask that he be graced with immortal youth, he tragically continued to age, ever approaching death, much like the famous paradox of Achilles persuing the tortoise, with each step the warrior cuts the distance between himself and his quarry in half, but not matter how small the gap becomes between them, he never reaches his prey.  So Time grows older, evolves with ever-increasing complexity, taxes itself with birth, maturation, and decay, and yet goes on without end.  The text here suggests that the Goddess (another one of the poems many anima figures) is the concubine of the Tithonus, and since we are speaking here of moonrise, not sunrise, Tithonic Time has two lovers, or else a lover with a duel nature, the dawn of night and the dawn of day, and here we have the former, the eastern horizon, compared to a palatial balcony, as it grows white at nightfall.  (We should remember the Commedia too is diachronic, one Dante inside the poem as the aspirant, and one outside the poem, writing it.)  The eastern horizon whitens.  This whitening we have seen in earlier parts of the Commedia as a killing frost, which is shaken off the dying vegetation when the sun rise spreads its warmth, and there is much here which suggests both warmth and cold, i.e., the chill of old age and the warmth of the embrace of lovers.  The moonrise Aurora has a forehead beset with cold gems in the shape of the constillation Scorpio, a cold-blooded animal, whose deadly sting kills with a chilling cold, its tail smiting the nations (peruote la gente) indicating a tumuluous period in historical times, the which tragedy is amply alluded to throughout the Commedia.  The Goddess has taken two steps already as the moon has yet to appear, but her ground or below-the-horizon speed is about to become air-speed as she undergoes a metamorphoses from one who walks to one who flies, the Time of youth seeming expansive and slow, and yet that of the aged interminably condensing and flying.  Time promises a lover's consumation, the sweet arms, as line three here asserts, of a lover, and yet delivers a heartbreaking abandonment.  Somewhere Rilke talks of lovers immersed in a kind of amniotic sea, and as one emerges, the other is submerged, and old Tithonus here is submerged, just as the Moon Aurora rises, and at this moment Dante the aspirant is overcome with sleep.  Why?  Because like Tithonus the aspirant's daytime consciousness has grown old and fatigued, and the living body whose flesh is ancient Adam's can no longer sustain itself, but falls into a sleep and a dream.  The number five is the number of mortal man, and five is the number of those on this bank/bed that Dante reclines on, because in ordinary waking consciousness we have five senses, and all but one of these senses disappears, only dream vision remaining, as the dreamer becomes a pilgrim separated from his daytime illusion, to achieve an almost (quasi) divinity.  The Divine here relating to the word divination, wherein the dreamer is able to see that Time is not divided into the known past, the passing present, and the unknown future, but is experienced a whole, i.e., it moves from line to plane to sphere.  The swallow cries as if remembering its former woes, the reference to the myth of Procne, Philomela, and Tireus, a story of rape, betrayal, the eating of one's own children, and the metamorphoses of tragic human language to plaintive bird song.  But the dreamer is free of the prison of flesh and its remembrance of former woes, and yet a transformation has occured within him as well, and he too is abducted, abducted by a golden eagle (a solar reference surely, and the animus figure of Zues, the ultimate male saducer and rapist) who catches the dreambody in his talons) like unto Ganymede taken up in rapture to the abode of the Gods.  That the figues of Ganymede and Tithonus are interwoven, there can be no doubt, since both had a mortal beauty which made then victims of an immortal's lust, the one becoming a decrepit old man, the other the cup-bearer slave of the Gods.  Ganymedeic Time is a time of exile, as the youth's rapture tears him away from earthly family and friends, just as the historical mortal Dante was likewise exiled.  The dreamer in the talons of the God, in his rapture, still retains a mortal thought, and that thought is that this celestial Time is mechanical, and only acting out of force of habit.  Now how brilliant is this?  Time being sentient, but not volitional in its unfolding, but rather a victim of it's own nature, it's own past.  The eagle falls like lightning, snatches the dreamer, and flies like Icarus into a sun-like fire.  Here sleep is broken by the heat, and here another complicated myth is birthed, that of Achille's, who is frozen with fear and confusion when he is abducted by his mother (whom he does not recognize) from the half-bestial state of the centuars to a human conflicted and warring state of consciousness, a state of Time, let us call it Achillian-Time, which is almost immortal, but not quite, his heel, still subject to mortality, being the grounding wherein he is most human (the word human, etymologically derived from humus, earth, mouse), and most vulnerable.  The heat of the dream-sun has been instantaneously transformed to freezing fright, and Dante discovers that he has been carried up the mountain and through Purgatorial Time by Saint Lucy, Light herself, the very saint whose chant the princes were performing in the valley before the aspirant Dante succumbed to sleep.  It is Lucy too who is the Saint intrumental in saving Dante when he started on this journey of transformation.  Dante awakes, and is again with Virgil at the gates of Purgatory proper.  He is facing that sea, which metaphorically nearly drowned him in the first canto of the poem, and which he somehow unconsciously crossed to arrive at the Purgatorial mount/island.  This sea now lies below him.  Virgil's explanation awakens the sleeper a second time, so that we see sleep from two sides, the side revealed from the dreamer's point of view, in the heat of the sun, and the side revealed from waking consciousness, at midmorning, the sun already two-hours old (the aging Tithonic sun), with the aspirant having arrived like Achilles into a new place, a new space, yet not knowing that his divine mother had ported him here, just as when, in the moment of birth, the infant arrives in this world, not knowing how his fetus was begotten and developed, or what this new world is which embraces him.  These few comments are but hints barely touching on all the diminsions of Time, consciousness and language that this poetry expresses, a poetry that is so daunting to the ordinary consciousness yet so exilerating to the altered state of awareness that it has birthed.  It is almost as if the complexity of this poetry, matching the complexity of ourselves and our world, has unified the conflicted things inside us, and reconciled them through its mythical-metaphoric permutations.  This is the simplicity of profoundity, so different from the simplicity of ignorance.  And we have not even entered Purgatory, but only stand outside its gate, the whole unfolding of our journey from anxiety to grace still awaiting its first steps towards fulfillment.  But by now, although we are but babes in this new world, we are at least starting to be able to read, to read in the Dantean sense, and this attainment may enable us to procede.

(After pondering how I might comment on this canto for a few days, I went to bed last night, during a storm, about 1 o'clock, woke at 3, wrote the above, returned to bed at 5, and dreampt that I awakened again, and accompanied by a friend from high school, came back into my office, to show him my work.  I flipped the light switch, but the light burned out.  At this point I did not realize I was dreaming.  Then others came, a pair of teenaged twins with caucasian skin, but knotted Rastifarian hair, which I compared to my own hair, and an old college professor who brought an antique typwriter to record my work.  This dream had about it a strong feeling of reality, as if, above all, it were trying to show me how we are simultaneously alive in many different space/time dimensions, and that sometimes the veil thins between these dimensions so that they touch and interchange those mythic-metaphors we find throughout Dante's poem.)

The study of cosmology is the study of the unconscious.  It cannot be otherwise, for whatever we might believe to be the conscious awareness has evolved from and emerges from the entire universe.  There is nothing that we can know or experience that is not dictated by this cosmology, and even our probings of that cosmology may only go so far and so deep as that entirety allows.  Dante is a cosmological poet, and the Commedia is an entity wherein that cosmology has been particularly forthcoming in allowing certain of its essences, its fundamentals, to be accessible to the conscious mind.  The poem's intense and involving reality, if we should presume to call it that, is what Dante would call the soul, that is to say, the cosmologist interacting with what he would call God, that is to say, cosmology.  His telescope, his microscope, his psychological techniques, are language.  There is a surface script and many deeper subscripts.  They are all one.  This subscript is written in what he would have called allegory.  Think of a surface being folded, folded again, folded again, and again, with rhymes, rhythms, pulses, with metaphors, historical references, geographic references, celestial observations, literary and mythological allusions, and so forth and so on.  His technique is based on the allegoria of this polysemous, multivalent folding: what is literal, is the surface — history, journalism, factual account; what is typological is the comparison of texts — Christian, Pagan, what have you; what is tropological is the moral implication of the texts, its revelations concerning the consequences of our actions or what Eastern religious modalities would call karma; and like Jung, the fourth, the allegrical, is categorically different then these other three, in that it is the composite of them.  Any kind of reading, writing, feeling, interpreting, translating that we might do, whether we are consciously aware of it or not, keeps tending towards this repeated layering or folding which is a set or subset of these four, some fragmentated fractalized glimpse of the entirety of the cosmos holographically presented as this allegoria.  What does the angel at the gate of Purgatory mean?  Why is he dressed in ashen-colored clothes?  Why is that Saint Lucy is Dante's passport to these higher realms of consciousness?  Why does the keeper of the gate carve seven letter P's in Dante's forehead?  Why does Dante strike his breast three times?  What is the significance of the three steps — the marble polished like a mirror, the dark conglomerate, and the sanguine?  What do the silver and the golden keys mean?  Why does the gate make such a wrenching sound as it turns on its hinges?  How is it that Dante, a poet and a living person, has access to these regions which are the domain only of disembodied souls?  Why does the Angel of the gate warn Dante not to look back?  Why does Dante hear, or think he hears, the Te Deum Laudamus, in polyphonic weavings, sometimes distinctly, and sometimes fading, as at the canto's conclusion.  All of these are cosmological questions, and the depth to which we pursue them in our own souls as we read is precisely the depth to which our souls are revealed to us.  Will we accept the given answers of centuries and centuries of commentators?  Or will we add new insights, new folds, new layers of richness and depth?

These particulars are laid out as particulars threaded together as a sequence, dots in a line, at first reading, which become a sphere of intermingling essences when we have assimilated them as a totality.  Contemplating this, a terrible and wondrous phrase comes to me: Revelation is obliteration.               

1  The concubine of old Tithonus now
2  Gleamed white upon the eastern balcony,
3  Forth from the arms of her sweet paramour;

1  La concubina di Titone antico
2  già s'imbiancava al balco d'orïente,
3  fuor de le braccia del suo dolce amico;

4  With gems her forehead all relucent was,
5  Set in the shape of that cold animal
6  Which with its tail doth smite amain the nations,

4  di gemme la sua fronte era lucente,
5  poste in figura del freddo animale
6  che con la coda percuote la gente;

7  And of the steps, with which she mounts, the Night
8  Had taken two in that place where we were,
9  And now the third was bending down its wings;

7  e la notte, de' passi con che sale,
8  fatti avea due nel loco ov' eravamo,
9  e 'l terzo già chinava in giuso l'ale;

10  When I, who something had of Adam in me,
11  Vanquished by sleep, upon the grass reclined,
12  There were all five of us already sat.

10  quand' io, che meco avea di quel d'Adamo,
11  vinto dal sonno, in su l'erba inchinai
12  là 've già tutti e cinque sedavamo.

13  Just at the hour when her sad lay begins
14  The little swallow, near unto the morning,
15  Perchance in memory of her former woes,

13  Ne l'ora che comincia i tristi lai
14  la rondinella presso a la mattina,
15 forse a memoria de' suo' primi guai,

16  And when the mind of man, a wanderer
17  More from the flesh, and less by thought imprisoned,
18  Almost prophetic in its visions is,

16  e che la mente nostra, peregrina
17  più da la carne e men da' pensier presa,
18  a le sue visïon quasi è divina,

19  In dreams it seemed to me I saw suspended
20  An eagle in the sky, with plumes of gold,
21  With wings wide open, and intent to stoop,

19  in sogno mi parea veder sospesa
20  un'aguglia nel ciel con penne d'oro,
21  con l'ali aperte e a calare intesa;

22  And this, it seemed to me, was where had been
23  By Ganymede his kith and kin abandoned,
24  When to the high consistory he was rapt.

22  ed esser mi parea là dove fuoro
23  abbandonati i suoi da Ganimede,
24  quando fu ratto al sommo consistoro.

25  I thought within myself, perchance he strikes
26  From habit only here, and from elsewhere
27  Disdains to bear up any in his feet.

25  Fra me pensava: “Forse questa fiede
26  pur qui per uso, e forse d'altro loco
27  disdegna di portarne suso in piede.”

28  Then wheeling somewhat more, it seemed to me,
29  Terrible as the lightning he descended,
30  And snatched me upward even to the fire.

28  Poi mi parea che, poi rotata un poco,
29  terribil come folgor discendesse,
30  e me rapisse suso infino al foco.

31  Therein it seemed that he and I were burning,
32  And the imagined fire did scorch me so,
33  That of necessity my sleep was broken.

31  Ivi parea che ella e io ardesse;
32  e sì lo 'ncendio imaginato cosse,
33  che convenne che 'l sonno si rompesse.

34  Not otherwise Achilles started up,
35  Around him turning his awakened eyes,
36  And knowing not the place in which he was,

34  Non altrimenti Achille si riscosse,
34  li occhi svegliati rivolgendo in giro
35  e non sappiendo là dove si fosse,

37  What time from Chiron stealthily his mother
38  Carried him sleeping in her arms to Scyros,
39  Wherefrom the Greeks withdrew him afterwards,

37  quando la madre da Chirón a Schiro
38  trafuggò lui dormendo in le sue braccia,
39  là onde poi li Greci il dipartiro;

40  Than I upstarted, when from off my face
41  Sleep fled away; and pallid I became,
42  As doth the man who freezes with affright.

40  che mi scoss' io, sì come da la faccia
41  mi fuggì 'l sonno, e diventa' ismorto,
42  come fa l'uom che, spaventato, agghiaccia.

43  Only my Comforter was at my side,
44  And now the sun was more than two hours high,
45  And turned towards the sea-shore was my face.

43  Dallato m'era solo il mio conforto,
44  e 'l sole er' alto già più che due ore,
45  e 'l viso m'era a la marina torto.

46  "Be not intimidated," said my Lord,
47  "Be reassured, for all is well with us;
48  Do not restrain, but put forth all thy strength.

46  “Non aver tema,” disse il mio segnore;
47  “fatti sicur, ché noi semo a buon punto;
48  non stringer, ma rallarga ogne vigore.

49  Thou hast at length arrived at Purgatory;
50  See there the cliff that closes it around;
51  See there the entrance, where it seems disjoined.

49  Tu se' omai al purgatorio giunto:
50  vedi là il balzo che 'l chiude dintorno;
51  vedi l'entrata là 've par digiunto.

52  Whilom at dawn, which doth precede the day,
53  When inwardly thy spirit was asleep
54  Upon the flowers that deck the land below,

52  Dianzi, ne l'alba che procede al giorno,
53  quando l'anima tua dentro dormia,
54  sovra li fiori ond' è là giù addorno

55  There came a Lady and said: 'I am Lucia;
56  Let me take this one up, who is asleep;
57  So will I make his journey easier for him.'

55  venne una donna, e disse: 'I' son Lucia;
56  lasciatemi pigliar costui che dorme;
57  sì l'agevolerò per la sua via.'

58  Sordello and the other noble shapes
59  Remained; she took thee, and, as day grew bright,
60  Upward she came, and I upon her footsteps.

58  Sordel rimase e l'altre genti forme;
59  ella ti tolse, e come 'l dì fu chiaro,
60  sen venne suso; e io per le sue orme.

61  She laid thee here; and first her beauteous eyes
62  That open entrance pointed out to me;
63  Then she and sleep together went away."

61  Qui ti posò, ma pria mi dimostraro
62  li occhi suoi belli quella intrata aperta;
63  poi ella e 'l sonno ad una se n'andaro.”

64  In guise of one whose doubts are reassured,
65  And who to confidence his fear doth change,
66  After the truth has been discovered to him, 

64  A guisa d'uom che 'n dubbio si raccerta
65  e che muta in conforto sua paura,
66  poi che la verità li è discoperta,

67  So did I change; and when without disquiet
68  My Leader saw me, up along the cliff
69  He moved, and I behind him, tow'rd the height.

67  mi cambia' io; e come sanza cura
68  vide me 'l duca mio, su per lo balzo
69  si mosse, e io di rietro inver' l'altura.

70  Reader, thou seest well how I exalt
71  My theme, and therefore if with greater art
72  I fortify it, marvel not thereat.

70  Lettor, tu vedi ben com' io innalzo
71  la mia matera, e però con più arte
72  non ti maravigliar s'io la rincalzo.

73  Nearer approached we, and were in such place,
74  That there, where first appeared to me a rift
75  Like to a crevice that disparts a wall,

73  Noi ci appressammo, ed eravamo in parte
74  che là dove pareami prima rotto,
75  pur come un fesso che muro diparte,

76  I saw a portal, and three stairs beneath,
77  Diverse in colour, to go up to it,
78  And a gate-keeper, who yet spake no word.

76  vidi una porta, e tre gradi di sotto
77 per gire ad essa, di color diversi,
78  e un portier ch'ancor non facea motto.

79  And as I opened more and more mine eyes,
80  I saw him seated on the highest stair,
81  Such in the face that I endured it not.

79  E come l'occhio più e più v'apersi,
80  vidil seder sovra 'l grado sovrano,
81  tal ne la faccia ch'io non lo soffersi;

 
82  And in his hand he had a naked sword,
83  Which so reflected back the sunbeams tow'rds us,
84  That oft in vain I lifted up mine eyes.

82  e una spada nuda avëa in mano,
83  che reflettëa i raggi sì ver' noi,
84  ch'io dirizzava spesso il viso in vano.

85  "Tell it from where you are, what is't you wish?"
86  Began he to exclaim; "where is the escort?
87  Take heed your coming hither harm you not!"

85  “Dite costinci: che volete voi?”
86  cominciò elli a dire, “ov' è la scorta?
87  Guardate che 'l venir sù non vi nòi.”
 
88  "A Lady of Heaven, with these things conversant,"
89  My Master answered him, "but even now
90  Said to us, 'Thither go; there is the portal.'"

88  “Donna del ciel, di queste cose accorta,”
89  rispuose 'l mio maestro a lui, “pur dianzi
90  ne disse: 'Andate là: quivi è la porta.'”

91  "And may she speed your footsteps in all good,"
92  Again began the courteous janitor;
93  "Come forward then unto these stairs of ours."

91  “Ed ella i passi vostri in bene avanzi,”
92  ricominciò il cortese portinaio:
93  “Venite dunque a' nostri gradi innanzi.”

94  Thither did we approach; and the first stair
95  Was marble white, so polished and so smooth,
96  I mirrored myself therein as I appear.

94  Là ne venimmo; e lo scaglion primaio
95  bianco marmo era sì pulito e terso,
96  ch'io mi specchiai in esso qual io paio.

97  The second, tinct of deeper hue than perse,
98  Was of a calcined and uneven stone,
99  Cracked all asunder lengthwise and across.

97  Era il secondo tinto più che perso,
98  d'una petrina ruvida e arsiccia,
99  crepata per lo lungo e per traverso.
 
100  The third, that uppermost rests massively,
101  Porphyry seemed to me, as flaming red
102  As blood that from a vein is spirting forth.
 
100  Lo terzo, che di sopra s'ammassiccia,
101  porfido mi parea, sì fiammeggiante
102  come sangue che fuor di vena spiccia.
 
103  Both of his feet was holding upon this
104  The Angel of God, upon the threshold seated,
105  Which seemed to me a stone of diamond.

103  Sovra questo tenëa ambo le piante
104 l'angel di Dio sedendo in su la soglia
105 che mi sembiava pietra di diamante.

106  Along the three stairs upward with good will
107  Did my Conductor draw me, saying: "Ask
108  Humbly that he the fastening may undo."

106 Per li tre gradi sù di buona voglia
107  mi trasse il duca mio, dicendo: “Chiedi
108  umilemente che 'l serrame scioglia.”

109  Devoutly at the holy feet I cast me,
110  For mercy's sake besought that he would open,
111  But first upon my breast three times I smote.

109  Divoto mi gittai a' santi piedi;
110  misericordia chiesi e ch'el m'aprisse,
111  ma tre volte nel petto pria mi diedi.

112  Seven P's upon my forehead he described
113  With the sword's point, and, "Take heed that thou wash
114  These wounds, when thou shalt be within," he said.

112  Sette P ne la fronte mi descrisse
113  col punton de la spada, e “Fa che lavi,
114  quando se' dentro, queste piaghe” disse.


115  Ashes, or earth that dry is excavated,
116  Of the same colour were with his attire,
117  And from beneath it he drew forth two keys.

115  Cenere, o terra che secca si cavi,
116  d'un color fora col suo vestimento;
117  e di sotto da quel trasse due chiavi.

118  One was of gold, and the other was of silver;
119  First with the white, and after with the yellow,
120  Plied he the door, so that I was content.

118  L'una era d'oro e l'altra era d'argento;
119  pria con la bianca e poscia con la gialla
120 fece a la porta sì, ch'i' fu' contento.
 
121  "Whenever faileth either of these keys
122  So that it turn not rightly in the lock,"
123  He said to us, "this entrance doth not open.

121  “Quandunque l'una d'este chiavi falla,
122  che non si volga dritta per la toppa,”
123  diss' elli a noi, “non s'apre questa calla.
 
124  More precious one is, but the other needs
125  More art and intellect ere it unlock,
126  For it is that which doth the knot unloose.

124  Più cara è l'una; ma l'altra vuol troppa
125 d'arte e d'ingegno avanti che diserri,
126 perch' ella è quella che 'l nodo digroppa.
 
127  From Peter I have them; and he bade me err
128  Rather in opening than in keeping shut,
129  If people but fall down before my feet."

127  Da Pier le tegno; e dissemi ch'i' erri
128  anzi ad aprir ch'a tenerla serrata,
129  pur che la gente a' piedi mi s'atterri.”
 
130  Then pushed the portals of the sacred door,
131  Exclaiming: "Enter; but I give you warning
132  That forth returns whoever looks behind."

130  Poi pinse l'uscio a la porta sacrata,
131  dicendo: “Intrate; ma facciovi accorti
132  che di fuor torna chi 'n dietro si guata.”
 
133  And when upon their hinges were turned round
134  The swivels of that consecrated gate,
135  Which are of metal, massive and sonorous,

133  E quando fuor ne' cardini distorti
134  li spigoli di quella regge sacra,
135  che di metallo son sonanti e forti,

136  Roared not so loud, nor so discordant seemed
137  Tarpeia, when was ta'en from it the good
138  Metellus, wherefore meagre it remained.

142  Tale imagine a punto mi rendea
143  ciò ch'io udiva, qual prender si suole
144  quando a cantar con organi si stea;

139  At the first thunder-peal I turned attentive,
140  And "Te Deum laudamus" seemed to hear
141  In voices mingled with sweet melody.

139  Io mi rivolsi attento al primo tuono,
140  e “Te Deum laudamus” mi parea
141  udire in voce mista al dolce suono.

142  Exactly such an image rendered me
143  That which I heard, as we are wont to catch,
144  When people singing with the organ stand; 

142  Tale imagine a punto mi rendea
143  ciò ch'io udiva, qual prender si suole
144  quando a cantar con organi si stea;

145  For now we hear, and now hear not, the words.

145  ch'or sì or no s'intendon le parole.

Canto X
The rusted seldom used gate of purgatory proper closes behind the protagonists, the aspirant Dante does not look back. The angel at the gate has warned him.  At the wide gate of Hell, the multitude is told to abandon hope, here at the narrow gate to purgatory the blessed few are told to surrender remorse. There follows a tortuous passage through that needle’s eye that Christ said would forbid the passage of those rich persons bloated to the size of camels by their pride in their possessions. The syntax here is tortured as is this rocky second birth canal (the first was at the exit of Hell), the hard unyielding rocks compared to the treacherous back and forth crashing of waves.  We are entering a different world where substance is simultaneously insubstantial and stones seem alive and capable of breath and speech.  Once through the needle’s eye, the protagonists arrive at a seeming desert opening out unto a limitless void, and bounded by a sheer rock wall three times (think trinity, or a human being’s tripartite nature) the height of man. Virgil has already told us we must use more art as we proceed, and here we find divine art carved into the adamantine walls.  This divine art is so infused with inspiration that it seems both permanent and ephemeral at once, like objects, or even are own bodies, which seem materially solid but whose value is as impermanent as a whim.

Heavy and light, hard/easy, yes/no these opposites are inclining more closely together now, Dante’s solid body is fatigued, Virgil’s dreambody is not.  But the dreambody is as lost here as the waking body, the moon of the dreamy and illusory night world is waning, and with her the entire labyrêve of twisted love —  art , imagination, beginning to dawn here as a more real reality, i.e., the fictive truths of Dante’s poem, his scripture, being more real than the maya of everday life.  The reader is being prepared here for lessons to be received in a more graceful and aesthetic way than those vulgar negative exemplars of Hell.

Three lessons are carved in the stone, and they draw yes and no like yin and yang together in one symbol. The first is the seven choruses which recall the seven P’s tattooed onto the aspirant’s brow (his consciousness, others can see those sins in him and he can feel them on himself), and forecasting the seven levels ascending up the mountain of Purgatory wherein each of the seven deadly sins will be purged.  The second lesson is of King David dancing before the Ark of the Covenant, while his wife, Michal, looks down disapprovingly.  (Note how this scene mirrors Beatrice looking down on the wayward Dante.) The third lesson is that of the Emperor Trajan obeying the command of a lowly widow. (Another anima figure, the aspirant here is sandwiched between Michal and the widow.).  Now Virgil warns Dante not to linger, to move along and to note the heavily laden prideful who are so encumbered by the burden of their sin that they cannot tolerate the least addition to their torment.  But we have been forewarned: Here the worst torments are but training exercises on the ascension towards blessedness, and the order of positive examples followed by negative ones has been established as the moral syntax of purgatory: first the carrot then the stick, the implication being that if we are alacritous in accepting the mercy of grace we need not have to balance the scales of justice by paying the debt of the suffering we have caused.  I am reminded here of the instructions of the priest to the corpse in The Tibetan Book of the Dead. Again and again the soul is guided towards the too-bright light of liberation, yet again and again the heavy deluded soul chooses the smoky light which draws them back down to that prison of suffering experienced as incarnation.

1  When we had crossed the threshold of the door
2  Which the perverted love of souls disuses,
3  Because it makes the crooked way seem straight,

1  Poi fummo dentro al soglio de la porta
2  che 'l mal amor de l'anime disusa,
3  perché fa parer dritta la via torta,

4  Re-echoing I heard it closed again;
5  And if I had turned back mine eyes upon it,
6  What for my failing had been fit excuse?

4  sonando la senti' esser richiusa;
5  e s'io avesse li occhi vòlti ad essa,
6  qual fora stata al fallo degna scusa?

7  We mounted upward through a rifted rock,
8  Which undulated to this side and that,
9  Even as a wave receding and advancing.

7  Noi salavam per una pietra fessa,
8  che si moveva e d'una e d'altra parte,
9  sì come l'onda che fugge e s'appressa.

10  "Here it behoves us use a little art,"
11  Began my Leader, "to adapt ourselves
12  Now here, now there, to the receding side."

10  “Qui si conviene usare un poco d'arte,”
11  cominciò 'l duca mio, “in accostarsi
12  or quinci, or quindi al lato che si parte.”

13  And this our footsteps so infrequent made,
14  That sooner had the moon's decreasing disk
15  Regained its bed to sink again to rest,

13  E questo fece i nostri passi scarsi,
14  tanto che pria lo scemo de la luna
15  rigiunse al letto suo per ricorcarsi,

16  Than we were forth from out that needle's eye;
17  But when we free and in the open were,
18  There where the mountain backward piles itself,

16  che noi fossimo fuor di quella cruna;
17  ma quando fummo liberi e aperti
18  sù dove il monte in dietro si rauna,

19  I wearied out, and both of us uncertain
20  About our way, we stopped upon a plain
21  More desolate than roads across the deserts.

19  ïo stancato e amendue incerti
20  di nostra via, restammo in su un piano
21  solingo più che strade per diserti.

22  From where its margin borders on the void,
23  To foot of the high bank that ever rises,
24  A human body three times told would measure;

22  Da la sua sponda, ove confina il vano,
23  al piè de l'alta ripa che pur sale,
24  misurrebbe in tre volte un corpo umano;
25  And far as eye of mine could wing its flight,
26  Now on the left, and on the right flank now,
27  The same this cornice did appear to me.

25  e quanto l'occhio mio potea trar d'ale,
26  or dal sinistro e or dal destro fianco,
27  questa cornice mi parea cotale.

28  Thereon our feet had not been moved as yet,
29  When I perceived the embankment round about,
30  Which all right of ascent had interdicted,

28  Là sù non eran mossi i piè nostri anco,
29  quand' io conobbi quella ripa intorno
30  che dritto di salita aveva manco,

31  To be of marble white, and so adorned
32  With sculptures, that not only Polycletus,
33  But Nature's self, had there been put to shame.

31  esser di marmo candido e addorno
32 d'intagli sì, che non pur Policleto,
33 ma la natura lì avrebbe scorno.

34  The Angel, who came down to earth with tidings
35  Of peace, that had been wept for many a year,
36  And opened Heaven from its long interdict,

34  L'angel che venne in terra col decreto
35 de la molt' anni lagrimata pace,
36 ch'aperse il ciel del suo lungo divieto,

37  In front of us appeared so truthfully
38  There sculptured in a gracious attitude,
39  He did not seem an image that is silent.

37  dinanzi a noi pareva sì verace
38  quivi intagliato in un atto soave,
39 che non sembiava imagine che tace.

40  One would have sworn that he was saying, "Ave;"
41  For she was there in effigy portrayed
42  Who turned the key to ope the exalted love,

40  Giurato si saria ch'el dicesse “Ave!”;
41  perché iv' era imaginata quella
42 ch'ad aprir l'alto amor volse la chiave;

43  And in her mien this language had impressed,
44  "Ecce ancilla Dei," as distinctly
45  As any figure stamps itself in wax.

43  e avea in atto impressa esta favella
44  “Ecce ancilla Deï,” propriamente
43  come figura in cera si suggella.

46  "Keep not thy mind upon one place alone,"
47  The gentle Master said, who had me standing
48  Upon that side where people have their hearts;

46  “Non tener pur ad un loco la mente,”
47  disse 'l dolce maestro, che m'avea
48  da quella parte onde 'l cuore ha la gente.

49  Whereat I moved mine eyes, and I beheld
50  In rear of Mary, and upon that side
51  Where he was standing who conducted me,

49  Per ch'i' mi mossi col viso, e vedea
50  di retro da Maria, da quella costa
51  onde m'era colui che mi movea,

52  Another story on the rock imposed;
53  Wherefore I passed Virgilius and drew near,
54  So that before mine eyes it might be set.

52  un'altra storia ne la roccia imposta;
53  per ch'io varcai Virgilio, e fe'mi presso,
54  acciò che fosse a li occhi miei disposta.

55  There sculptured in the self-same marble were
56  The cart and oxen, drawing the holy ark,
57  Wherefore one dreads an office not appointed.

55  Era intagliato lì nel marmo stesso
56  lo carro e ' buoi, traendo l'arca santa,
57  per che si teme officio non commesso.
58  People appeared in front, and all of them
59  In seven choirs divided, of two senses
60  Made one say "No," the other, "Yes, they sing."

58  Dinanzi parea gente; e tutta quanta,
59  partita in sette cori, a' due mie' sensi
60  faceva dir l'un “No,” l'altro “Sì, canta.”

61  Likewise unto the smoke of the frankincense,
62  Which there was imaged forth, the eyes and nose
63  Were in the yes and no discordant made.

61  Similemente al fummo de li 'ncensi
62  che v'era imaginato, li occhi e 'l naso
63 e al sì e al no discordi fensi.

64  Preceded there the vessel benedight,
65  Dancing with girded loins, the humble Psalmist,
66  And more and less than King was he in this.

64  Lì precedeva al benedetto vaso,
65  trescando alzato, l'umile salmista,
66  e più e men che re era in quel caso.

67  Opposite, represented at the window
68  Of a great palace, Michal looked upon him,
69  Even as a woman scornful and afflicted.

67  Di contra, effigïata ad una vista
68  d'un gran palazzo, Micòl ammirava
69  sì come donna dispettosa e trista.

70  I moved my feet from where I had been standing,
71  To examine near at hand another story,
72  Which after Michal glimmered white upon me.

70  I' mossi i piè del loco dov' io stava,
71  per avvisar da presso un'altra istoria,
72  che di dietro a Micòl mi biancheggiava.

73  There the high glory of the Roman Prince
74  Was chronicled, whose great beneficence
75  Moved Gregory to his great victory;

73  Quiv' era storïata l'alta gloria
74  del roman principato, il cui valore
75  mosse Gregorio a la sua gran vittoria;

76  'Tis of the Emperor Trajan I am speaking;
77  And a poor widow at his bridle stood,
78  In attitude of weeping and of grief.

76  i' dico di Traiano imperadore;
77  e una vedovella li era al freno,
78  di lagrime atteggiata e di dolore.

79  Around about him seemed it thronged and full
80  Of cavaliers, and the eagles in the gold
81  Above them visibly in the wind were moving.

79  Intorno a lui parea calcato e pieno
80  di cavalieri, e l'aguglie ne l'oro
81  sovr' essi in vista al vento si movieno.

82  The wretched woman in the midst of these
83  Seemed to be saying: "Give me vengeance, Lord,
84  For my dead son, for whom my heart is breaking."

82  La miserella intra tutti costoro
83  pareva dir: “Segnor, fammi vendetta
84  di mio figliuol ch'è morto, ond' io m'accoro”;

85  And he to answer her: "Now wait until
86  I shall return." And she: "My Lord," like one
87  In whom grief is impatient, "shouldst thou not

85  ed elli a lei rispondere: “Or aspetta
86  tanto ch'i' torni”; e quella: “Segnor mio,”
87  come persona in cui dolor s'affretta,

88  Return?" And he: "Who shall be where I am
89  Will give it thee." And she: "Good deed of others
90  What boots it thee, if thou neglect thine own?"

88  “se tu non torni?”; ed ei: “Chi fia dov' io,
89  la ti farà”; ed ella: “L'altrui bene
90  a te che fia, se 'l tuo metti in oblio?”;
91  Whence he: "Now comfort thee, for it behoves me
92  That I discharge my duty ere I move;
93  Justice so wills, and pity doth retain me."

91  ond' elli: “Or ti conforta; ch'ei convene
92  ch'i' solva il mio dovere anzi ch'i' mova:
93  giustizia vuole e pietà mi ritene.”

94  He who on no new thing has ever looked
95  Was the creator of this visible language,
96  Novel to us, for here it is not found.

94  Colui che mai non vide cosa nova
95  produsse esto visibile parlare,
96  novello a noi perché qui non si trova.

97  While I delighted me in contemplating
98  The images of such humility,
99  And dear to look on for their Maker's sake,

97  Mentr' io mi dilettava di guardare
98  l'imagini di tante umilitadi,
99  e per lo fabbro loro a veder care,

100  "Behold, upon this side, but rare they make
101  Their steps," the Poet murmured, "many people;
102  These will direct us to the lofty stairs." 

100  “Ecco di qua, ma fanno i passi radi,”
101  mormorava il poeta, “molte genti:
102  questi ne 'nvïeranno a li alti gradi.”

103  Mine eyes, that in beholding were intent
104  To see new things, of which they curious are,
105  In turning round towards him were not slow.

103  Li occhi miei, ch'a mirare eran contenti
104  per veder novitadi ond' e' son vaghi,
105  volgendosi ver' lui non furon lenti. 

106  But still I wish not, Reader, thou shouldst swerve
107  From thy good purposes, because thou hearest
108  How God ordaineth that the debt be paid;

106  Non vo' però, lettor, che tu ti smaghi
107  di buon proponimento per udire
108 come Dio vuol che 'l debito si paghi.

109  Attend not to the fashion of the torment,
110  Think of what follows; think that at the worst
111  It cannot reach beyond the mighty sentence.

109  Non attender la forma del martìre:
110  pensa la succession; pensa ch'al peggio
111  oltre la gran sentenza non può ire.

112  "Master," began I, "that which I behold
113  Moving towards us seems to me not persons,
114  And what I know not, so in sight I waver."

112  Io cominciai: “Maestro, quel ch'io veggio
113  muovere a noi, non mi sembian persone,
114  e non so che, sì nel veder vaneggio.”

115  And he to me: "The grievous quality
116  Of this their torment bows them so to earth,
117  That my own eyes at first contended with it;

115  Ed elli a me: “La grave condizione
116  di lor tormento a terra li rannicchia,
117  sì che ' miei occhi pria n'ebber tencione.

118  But look there fixedly, and disentangle
119  By sight what cometh underneath those stones;
120  Already canst thou see how each is stricken."

118  Ma guarda fiso là, e disviticchia
119  col viso quel che vien sotto a quei sassi:
120  già scorger puoi come ciascun si picchia.”

121  O ye proud Christians! wretched, weary ones!
122  Who, in the vision of the mind infirm
123  Confidence have in your backsliding steps,

121  O superbi cristian, miseri lassi,
122  che, de la vista de la mente infermi,
123  fidanza avete ne' retrosi passi,
124  Do ye not comprehend that we are worms,
125  Born to bring forth the angelic butterfly
126  That flieth unto judgment without screen?

124  non v'accorgete voi che noi siam vermi
125  nati a formar l'angelica farfalla,
126  che vola a la giustizia sanza schermi?

127  Why floats aloft your spirit high in air?
128  Like are ye unto insects undeveloped,
129  Even as the worm in whom formation fails!

127  Di che l'animo vostro in alto galla,
128  poi siete quasi antomata in difetto,
129  sì come vermo in cui formazion falla?

130  As to sustain a ceiling or a roof,
131  In place of corbel, oftentimes a figure
132  Is seen to join its knees unto its breast,

130  Come per sostentar solaio o tetto,
131  per mensola talvolta una figura
132  si vede giugner le ginocchia al petto,

133  Which makes of the unreal real anguish
134  Arise in him who sees it, fashioned thus
135  Beheld I those, when I had ta'en good heed.

133  la qual fa del non ver vera rancura
134  nascere 'n chi la vede; così fatti
135  vid' io color, quando puosi ben cura.

136  True is it, they were more or less bent down,
137  According as they more or less were laden;
138  And he who had most patience in his looks

136  Vero è che più e meno eran contratti
137  secondo ch'avien più e meno a dosso;
138  e qual più pazïenza avea ne li atti,

139  Weeping did seem to say, "I can no more!"

139  piangendo parea dicer: “Più non posso."

Canto XI
Our senses, with the possible exception of smell, are only emergent properties to explore a temporally evolving 3-D space, thus we can never explore higher dimensions with them, they simply are not designed to so.  But language is a kind of out-of-this world sense, a meta-sense, if you will, in its metaphoric/metonymic functions and so we could hypothesize that it is this sense that allows us glimpses of higher dimensions.  The Commedia, taken as a whole, could almost be described as a higher dimension incursion into our 3-D space/entropic time-universe, and Dante's version of the Lord's prayer could be read as a key to a higher dimensional universe.  Something is passing back and forth between higher and lower dimensions, and what Dante would call this something is prayer, but not any kind of prayer, prayer that is praise.  Why this praise, because when we encounter awe, we feel gratitude, and gratitude elicits praise.  If you're a traditional Christian theist, that praise is not only for God, it is God's very organizational substance, bubbling up chaotically from a lower state of organization to be formed by "accident" "fortuitousness" "synchronicity" "chance" "grace" into a higher level of organization.  Not for example the rhyme of "valore" (power, value, worth, courage") in line 4 with the word vapore (breath, vapor, line 6), wherein we see the relationship between the breath of earthly creatures and the praise that links them to ALL THAT IS.  One could say that praise for ALL THAT IS is the antidote to pride, and pride the first, the most dangerous and most Luciferian of sins because it leads us into the terrible delusion that we are living in a universe from which we are separated, where everything beyond our innervated/appetitive self is predator or prey, and that our personal power, safety and worthiness can only comb by forcing others to succumb, to be subservient, in short to be our slaves or victims.  In such a universe, there can never be harmony, nor grace, nor these higher levels of bliss and cooperation that we see here as our incarnated, lower dimensional selves, and our disincarnate higher dimensional selves touch and enrich one another in this field of mutual praise, a praise, which both sides must remember is not something originating inside their individual selves, i.e., their selfishness, but which only arises as a phenomenon of the whole.  All this is the lesson that the prideful, weighted down by the delusion of a separate self, must learn to lighten, or "enlighten" themselves and ascend. 

What else is happening in this Canto?  Virgil and Dante are looking for a way to ascend that is passable for one who is still incarnated, in short, a to ascend for the incarnated reader as well.  The prideful who have learned — learned, as the damned never learned — through the process of their purgation.  As they feel the weight of the separated self fully (line 20: the old adversary), only then are they willing to release that burden, as no real part of their essential selves, only then can they take the path that they will show to the protagonists.  And, it is important to note, it is not that separated self who may be the judge of their progress, one could say, that this lightening of the load happens automatically as soon as that purging has been authentically accomplished.  Clearly, praise and gratitude for ALL THAT IS quickens this process.  One should also note that as long as any vestige of the separated self remains, that self must be subject to the vicissitudes of Time, progress is a temporal process, just as punishment was an interminable process.  What is the most impervious natural material to Time's transformations?  Stone.  And that is why the prideful penitents find themselves wearily weighted down as stony shadows burdened by stone, their weariness, no a punishment per se, as the torments of Hell were, but a necessary precondition for utter surrender, utter release of that burden.  That those whom the protagonists meet in the Canto are in the process of coming to this point of surrender is show by their recitation of the Lord's prayer, and their reluctance to say their own names, referring to themselves in the broader sense of their ancestors, for example, or their place in the procession of penitents.  That they have not yet reached their goal of surrender is conversely shown by the fact that they are still more connected to that which lies below them, the circumstances and connections of their earthly life, rather than whatever or whomever might have risen above them.  When they give their exegesis of fame, and it's ephemerality, they revert to earthly metaphors, grass greened and then withered by the same sun.  It has not yet occurred to them that each stage of each blade of that grass in cooperation with the sun has an eternal function to fulfill in the harmony of ALL THAT IS, and that no one's effort or life at any stage is a waste.  Their view is a temporal one — inception, maturity, decay— and as long as this temporality exists in them, they are incapable of rising further and cannot ascend to Paradise.

Once again, at the end of this Canto, Dante's earthly exile from Florence is presaged.  Already Dante is beginning to get the inkling that his home can never again be any place on earth or anywhere in incarnation.  As readers, at this point in the Commedia, we should feel the same.   
 
1  "Our Father, thou who dwellest in the heavens,
2   Not circumscribed, but from the greater love
3   Thou bearest to the first effects on high,

1  “O Padre nostro, che ne' cieli stai, 
2   non circunscritto, ma per più amore
3  ch'ai primi effetti di là sù tu hai,

4  Praised be thy name and thine omnipotence
5  By every creature, as befitting is
6  To render thanks to thy sweet effluence.

4  laudato sia 'l tuo nome e 'l tuo valore
5  da ogne creatura, com' è degno
6  di render grazie al tuo dolce vapore.

7  Come unto us the peace of thy dominion,
8  For unto it we cannot of ourselves,
9  If it come not, with all our intellect.

7  Vegna ver' noi la pace del tuo regno,
8  ché noi ad essa non potem da noi,
9  s'ella non vien, con tutto nostro ingegno.

10  Even as thine own Angels of their will
11  Make sacrifice to thee, Hosanna singing,
12  So may all men make sacrifice of theirs.

10  Come del suo voler li angeli tuoi
11  fan sacrificio a te, cantando osanna,
12  così facciano li uomini de' suoi.

13  Give unto us this day our daily manna,
14  Withouten which in this rough wilderness
15  Backward goes he who toils most to advance.

13  Dà oggi a noi la cotidiana manna,
14  sanza la qual per questo aspro diserto
15  a retro va chi più di gir s'affanna.

16  And even as we the trespass we have suffered
17  Pardon in one another, pardon thou
18  Benignly, and regard not our desert.

16  E come noi lo mal ch'avem sofferto
17  perdoniamo a ciascuno, e tu perdona
18  benigno, e non guardar lo nostro merto.

19  Our virtue, which is easily o'ercome,
20  Put not to proof with the old Adversary,
21  But thou from him who spurs it so, deliver.

19  Nostra virtù che di legger s'adona,
20  non spermentar con l'antico avversaro,
22  ma libera da lui che sì la sprona.

22  This last petition verily, dear Lord,
23  Not for ourselves is made, who need it not,
24  But for their sake who have remained behind us."

22  Quest' ultima preghiera, segnor caro,
23  già non si fa per noi, ché non bisogna,
24  ma per color che dietro a noi restaro.”

25  Thus for themselves and us good furtherance
26  Those shades imploring, went beneath a weight
27  Like unto that of which we sometimes dream,

25  Così a sé e noi buona ramogna
26  quell' ombre orando, andavan sotto 'l pondo,
27 simile a quel che talvolta si sogna,

28  Unequally in anguish round and round
29  And weary all, upon that foremost cornice,
30  Purging away the smoke-stains of the world.

28  disparmente angosciate tutte a tondo
29  e lasse su per la prima cornice,
30  purgando la caligine del mondo.

31  If there good words are always said for us,
32  What may not here be said and done for them,
33  By those who have a good root to their will?

31  Se di là sempre ben per noi si dice,
32  di qua che dire e far per lor si puote
33  da quei c'hanno al voler buona radice?

34  Well may we help them wash away the marks
35  That hence they carried, so that clean and light
36  They may ascend unto the starry wheels!

34  Ben si de' loro atar lavar le note
35  che portar quinci, sì che, mondi e lievi,
36  possano uscire a le stellate ruote.

37  "Ah! so may pity and justice you disburden
38  Soon, that ye may have power to move the wing,
39  That shall uplift you after your desire,

37  “Deh, se giustizia e pietà vi disgrievi
38  tosto, sì che possiate muover l'ala,
39  che secondo il disio vostro vi lievi,

40  Show us on which hand tow'rd the stairs the way
41  Is shortest, and if more than one the passes,
42  Point us out that which least abruptly falls;

40  mostrate da qual mano inver' la scala
41  si va più corto; e se c'è più d'un varco,
42  quel ne 'nsegnate che men erto cala;

43  For he who cometh with me, through the burden
44  Of Adam's flesh wherewith he is invested,
45  Against his will is chary of his climbing."

43  ché questi che vien meco, per lo 'ncarco
44  de la carne d'Adamo onde si veste,
45  al montar sù, contra sua voglia, è parco.”

46  The words of theirs which they returned to those
47  That he whom I was following had spoken,
48  It was not manifest from whom they came,

46  Le lor parole, che rendero a queste
47  che dette avea colui cu' io seguiva,
48  non fur da cui venisser manifeste;

49  But it was said: "To the right hand come with us
50  Along the bank, and ye shall find a pass
51  Possible for living person to ascend.

49  ma fu detto: “A man destra per la riva
50  con noi venite, e troverete il passo
51  possibile a salir persona viva.

52  And were I not impeded by the stone,
53  Which this proud neck of mine doth subjugate,
54  Whence I am forced to hold my visage down,

52  E s'io non fossi impedito dal sasso
53  che la cervice mia superba doma,
54  onde portar convienmi il viso basso,

55  Him, who still lives and does not name himself,
56  Would I regard, to see if I may know him
57  And make him piteous unto this burden.

55  cotesti, ch'ancor vive e non si noma,
56  guardere' io, per veder s'i' 'l conosco,
57  e per farlo pietoso a questa soma.

58  A Latian was I, and born of a great Tuscan;
59  Guglielmo Aldobrandeschi was my father;
60  I know not if his name were ever with you.

58  Io fui latino e nato d'un gran Tosco:
59  Guiglielmo Aldobrandesco fu mio padre;
60  non so se 'l nome suo già mai fu vosco.

61  The ancient blood and deeds of gallantry
62  Of my progenitors so arrogant made me
63  That, thinking not upon the common mother,

61  L'antico sangue e l'opere leggiadre
62  d'i miei maggior mi fer sì arrogante,
63  che, non pensando a la comune madre,

64  All men I held in scorn to such extent
65  I died therefor, as know the Sienese,
66  And every child in Campagnatico.

64  ogn' uomo ebbi in despetto tanto avante,
65  ch'io ne mori', come i Sanesi sanno,
66  e sallo in Campagnatico ogne fante.

67  I am Omberto; and not to me alone
68  Has pride done harm, but all my kith and kin
69  Has with it dragged into adversity.

67  Io sono Omberto; e non pur a me danno
68  superbia fa, ché tutti miei consorti
69  ha ella tratti seco nel malanno.

70  And here must I this burden bear for it
71  Till God be satisfied, since I did not
72  Among the living, here among the dead."

70  E qui convien ch'io questo peso porti
71  per lei, tanto che a Dio si sodisfaccia,
72  poi ch'io nol fe' tra ' vivi, qui tra ' morti.”

73  Listening I downward bent my countenance;
74  And one of them, not this one who was speaking,
75  Twisted himself beneath the weight that cramps him,

73  Ascoltando chinai in giù la faccia;
74  e un di lor, non questi che parlava,
75 si torse sotto il peso che li 'mpaccia,

76  And looked at me, and knew me, and called out,
77  Keeping his eyes laboriously fixed
78  On me, who all bowed down was going with them.

76  e videmi e conobbemi e chiamava,
77  tenendo li occhi con fatica fisi
78 a me che tutto chin con loro andava.

79  "O," asked I him, "art thou not Oderisi,
80  Agobbio's honour, and honour of that art
81  Which is in Paris called illuminating?"

79  “Oh!” diss'io lui, “non se' tu Oderisi,
80  l'onor d'Agobbio e l'onor di quell' arte
81 ch'alluminar chiamata è in Parisi?”

82  "Brother," said he, "more laughing are the leaves
83  Touched by the brush of Franco Bolognese;
84  All his the honour now, and mine in part.

82  “Frate,” diss' elli, “più ridon le carte
83  che pennelleggia Franco Bolognese;
84  l'onore è tutto or suo, e mio in parte.

85  In sooth I had not been so courteous
86  While I was living, for the great desire
87  Of excellence, on which my heart was bent.

85  Ben non sare' io stato sì cortese
86  mentre ch'io vissi, per lo gran disio
87  de l'eccellenza ove mio core intese.

88  Here of such pride is paid the forfeiture;
89  And yet I should not be here, were it not
90  That, having power to sin, I turned to God.

88  Di tal superbia qui si paga il fio;
89  e ancor non sarei qui, se non fosse
90  che, possendo peccar, mi volsi a Dio.

91  O thou vain glory of the human powers,
92  How little green upon thy summit lingers,
93  If't be not followed by an age of grossness!

91  Oh vana gloria de l'umane posse!
92  com' poco verde in su la cima dura,
93  se non è giunta da l'etati grosse!

94  In painting Cimabue thought that he
95  Should hold the field, now Giotto has the cry,
96  So that the other's fame is growing dim.

94  Credette Cimabue ne la pittura
95  tener lo campo, e ora ha Giotto il grido,
96  sì che la fama di colui è scura.

97  So has one Guido from the other taken
98  The glory of our tongue, and he perchance
99  Is born, who from the nest shall chase them both.

97  Così ha tolto l'uno a l'altro Guido
98  la gloria de la lingua; e forse è nato
99  chi l'uno e l'altro caccerà del nido.

100  Naught is this mundane rumour but a breath
101  Of wind, that comes now this way and now that,
102  And changes name, because it changes side.

100  Non è il mondan romore altro ch'un fiato
101 di vento, ch'or vien quinci e or vien quindi,
102 e muta nome perché muta lato.

103  What fame shalt thou have more, if old peel off
104  From thee thy flesh, than if thou hadst been dead
105  Before thou left the 'pappo' and the 'dindi,'

103  Che voce avrai tu più, se vecchia scindi
104  da te la carne, che se fossi morto
105  anzi che tu lasciassi il 'pappo' e 'l 'dindi,'

106  Ere pass a thousand years? which is a shorter
107  Space to the eterne, than twinkling of an eye
108  Unto the circle that in heaven wheels slowest.

106  pria che passin mill' anni? ch'è più corto
107  spazio a l'etterno, ch'un muover di ciglia
108  al cerchio che più tardi in cielo è torto.

109  With him, who takes so little of the road
110  In front of me, all Tuscany resounded;
111  And now he scarce is lisped of in Siena,

109  Colui che del cammin sì poco piglia
110  dinanzi a me, Toscana sonò tutta;
111  e ora a pena in Siena sen pispiglia,

112  Where he was lord, what time was overthrown
113  The Florentine delirium, that superb
114  Was at that day as now 'tis prostitute.

112  ond' era sire quando fu distrutta
113  la rabbia fiorentina, che superba
114  fu a quel tempo sì com' ora è putta.

115  Your reputation is the colour of grass
116  Which comes and goes, and that discolours it
117  By which it issues green from out the earth."

115  La vostra nominanza è color d'erba,
116  che viene e va, e quei la discolora
117  per cui ella esce de la terra acerba.”

118  And I: "Thy true speech fills my heart with good
119  Humility, and great tumour thou assuagest;
120  But who is he, of whom just now thou spakest?"

118  E io a lui: “Tuo vero dir m'incora
119  bona umiltà, e gran tumor m'appiani;
120  ma chi è quei di cui tu parlavi ora?”

121  "That," he replied, "is Provenzan Salvani,
122  And he is here because he had presumed
123  To bring Siena all into his hands.

121  “Quelli è,” rispuose, “Provenzan Salvani;
122  ed è qui perché fu presuntüoso
123  a recar Siena tutta a le sue mani.

124  He has gone thus, and goeth without rest
125  E'er since he died; such money renders back
126  In payment he who is on earth too daring."

124  Ito è così e va, sanza riposo,
125  poi che morì; cotal moneta rende
126  a sodisfar chi è di là troppo oso.”

127  And I: "If every spirit who awaits
128  The verge of life before that he repent,
129  Remains below there and ascends not hither,

127  E io: “Se quello spirito ch'attende,
128  pria che si penta, l'orlo de la vita,
129 qua giù dimora e qua sù non ascende,

130  (Unless good orison shall him bestead,)
131  Until as much time as he lived be passed,
132  How was the coming granted him in largess?"

130  se buona orazïon lui non aita,
131  prima che passi tempo quanto visse,
132  come fu la venuta lui largita?”

133  "When he in greatest splendour lived," said he,
134  "Freely upon the Campo of Siena,
135  All shame being laid aside, he placed himself;

133  “Quando vivea più glorïoso,” disse,
134  “liberamente nel Campo di Siena,
135  ogne vergogna diposta, s'affisse;

136  And there to draw his friend from the duress
137  Which in the prison-house of Charles he suffered,
138  He brought himself to tremble in each vein.

136  e lì, per trar l'amico suo di pena,
137  ch'e' sostenea ne la prigion di Carlo,
138  si condusse a tremar per ogne vena.

139  I say no more, and know that I speak darkly;
140  Yet little time shall pass before thy neighbours
141  Will so demean themselves that thou canst gloss it.

139  Più non dirò, e scuro so che parlo;
140  ma poco tempo andrà, che ' tuoi vicini
141  faranno sì che tu potrai chiosarlo.

142  This action has released him from those confines."

142  Quest' opera li tolse quei confini.”

Canto XII
A name is an address, an indexes, not a chiseled substitute for an identity fit only for a gravestone (which we have in this canto).  It is a homing signal only for certain libraries of experience and knowledge, and to yoke it to pride is to be a the lowliest kind of slave, an ox, burdened to perform laborious functions which in no way benefits your soul.  The weight of pride only arrogates and obscures the true function of a name.  The entities in these canto are quite careful to only tangentially refer to themselves through their position or family or by their position in this line of penitents.  And just as Dante, without knowing it, is erasing the tattoo on his forehead, which stands for, and is, the sin of pride, these penitents also, by a process of exhaustive erosion, are erasing the arrogance which brought them fame and also death.  Dante is working with negative exemplars here, the presence of pride, which should be absent, but is instead immortalized in stone, with an acrostic of pride, i.e. MAN, which includes 12 negative exemplars, that start with Lucifer (a periphrasis, he is unnamed) and concludes with the destruction of Troy.  The list ends, as only such a negative list could end, with a display of irony.  Because irony invokes an absence with its presence.  

All this done, Dante, the aspirant and prideful penitent, meets the angel, who apostrophizes all sinners — because it is a kind of original sin to have assigned to the ego function what properly belongs to the soul, and here, at a cleft in the rock — an absence which needs to be present — Dante has his first sin, the tattoo on his brow, removed.  Immediately his former fatigue, which has plagued him terribly throughout his climb, is expelled.  He becomes light, and he hears the music of the Beatitude (Blessed are the poor in spirit, i.e., the humble).  He is exhilarated, and Virgil smiles, because, as in the game of Indian poker, Virgil can see what is missing, and through the smile, and his own sense of lightness, Dante comes to know what is unstated, humility, with what has been effaced, Pride.

This whole canto is a tour de force of this game of absence and presence, with the emphasis, or rather the de-emphasis on humility, but humility as seen through negative exemplars of pride.  It would improper, and far from humble, for this virtue to call attention to itself.

An epidemic of over excitation always accompanies any deep reading of Dante. If it doesn’t dazzle and confound you with its brambling overgrowth of resonances, you haven’t fully committed yourself to your responsibilities as a reader.  The acrostic and the six pairs of pride exemplars which comprise the central pillar of this canto are cases in point.  But before we delve into the content of our reading, we have to consider the manner of our reading.  We are reading at a slow, walking pace, looking down at our own steps as they traverse not letters but images carved in gravestones.  How somber and how contemplative!  (Remember how both McLuhan and Benjamin told us how the content of our experience changes according to medium and our posture.  Words lying flat on a table in a book are not perceived in the same way as those same arrangements of letters seen raised gigantically above on a billboard or read on the tiny lit screen of a cell phone.). Bearing that circumstance in mind, we can now point out at least some cursory correspondences underlying these twelve exemplars.

The 12 arer arranged in 6 pairs and summarized by a 13th observation, not part of them, but implied in the twelve.  Think of the paired team of oxen metaphor beginning this canto.  Each pairing has a Biblical node and a pagan node linked by some commonality.  Imagine two termination points, a string vibrating with resonance flowing between them.  

The first pairing is that of Satan, unnamed, but referred to, and his is the Biblical node, the pagan node is that of Briareus, a giant who was mentioned, but not met, in the Inferno.  (Again absence and presence linked).  They are connected by the thunderbolt of lightning which defeated them.  There is also a pairing of opposites from the heat of lightning to the chill of death (mortal frost, line 30).  We think of hot fire, cold ashes, and also Satan frozen at the nadir of Hell.

Pairing two's pagan node are unnamed.  They are the Titans, whom Jove and his triumvirate of children, Apollo (Tymbaeus), Pallas Athena and Mars, brought to ruin.  The children of Jove are seen gazing  down (as we readers are gazing down) on the scattered members of the defeated giants, all brought low by Jove's thunderbolt, all exemplars of defeated pride.  The Biblical node is Nimrod, the vain builder of the tower of Babel, around him lie the titanic fragments of his arrogant assay.    

Pairing three is Niobe, as the pagan node, and Saul, and as the Biblical node.  Niobe's boasting of her children (7 sons, 7 daughters) has led to their murder by arrow by the 2 children of Latona, Apollo and Diana.  Niobe is turned into weeping stone, a clear correspondence between a stone that weeps, and the stones that Dante is walking on and reading as stones that cause weeping.  Niobe's tears become mountain springs.  (The numbers 7, and 2 are also important here.)  The pagan node here is Saul, who fled wounded after a battle with the Philistines, and committed suicide in the mountains of Samaria.  David curses the place, and thereafter these mountains become forever dry (think of the dry rocks in Eliot's the Wasteland).  The two are linked by dialectical opposites, Niobe as an overabundance of tears (water) and Saul's grave a waterless desert.  Both allude to rocky, mountainous places.

Pairing four is of Arachne, the pagan, and Rehoboam, the Biblical node.  Arachne is a braggart who attempts of hang herself, but is turned into a spider by Minerva.  Arachne could be said to be the artist whose arrogant ego over identifies with her work.  She becomes her work, in a kind cowardly failed suicide, succumbing to the jealously of divine inspiration.  Rehoboam was the son of Solomon.  His name, according to Charles Fillmore’s dictionary of Biblical names and places means one who dissipates himself with sensory profligacy.  Both a fool and a coward, he flees, where none give chase, the victim, like Arachne, of his own illusions and pretensions.

The fifth pairing is that of Eriphyle (pagan) and Sennacherib (Biblical).  Both victims of vanity, the child of pride, and both murdered by their own sons.

The last and sixth pairing is that of Cyrus the Elder as the pagan node and Holofernes as the Biblical one.  Both of these men were beheaded by women, Cyrus by the queen of his enemies, who placed his head in a jar of human blood.  (The head speaks, and these words of Dante's are attributed to this disembodied head, which links the poet himself to the sin of pride, for which this remote reference is a kind of echo of an otherwise absent confession).   Holofernes was beheaded by Judith.  Anachronistically we could compare this pairing to the anima/animus psychological archetypes of Jung.  Here the Anima chops off the overly aggressive head of the Animus.  Humility defeating pride as faith defeats reason.   

The 13th, the summary, is that the proud Towers of Troy, reduced to ashes and fragments, provide a link back to the destruction of the Satan and Briareus in the first pairing and also to Virgil as his Aeneas persona.  Aeneas is a fragment of Troy, who like the eye of a sliced up potato, sprouts Rome, the seat of St. Peter (stone), vicar of Christ.  Rome is also the new Jerusalem of the Christian world and also the former capitol of the pagan world.

This entire section contains the acrostic "Man" (Umo), each letter repeated 4 times in the acrostic where the U (Christian, Vulgate, Tuscan U) is replaced the Roman V, which is how the pagans carved the letter U in stone.   This acrostic was either unseen or uncommented upon for about 6 centuries, which suggests that it was not meant for any but the most attentive of readers or the eyes of God.  Note: whether people like it or not, cryptography is a thing throughout the Commedia, and it is clearly deliberate.

There is no way that I could elucidate all of the numerological correspondences here, but I think we must acknowledge throughout this work that Dante was a product of the Trivium (grammar, logic, rhetoric) and Quadrivium (arithmetic, astronomy, music, geometry) curriculums of medieval education.  We should therefore be on the alert for the intertwining of these disciplines in his work.  There is a curious geometrical phenomenon called "kissing numbers" or "Newton numbers" relating the number 1 to the number 12 (total 13).  If one places 12 identical spheres in a configuration wherein each sphere is in contact with as many other spheres as is possible, there is space for an identical 13th sphere at the center of the configuration: an absent presence, or present absence — take your pick.  Did Dante know about this?  I think he did.  And I think he was also aware of the 1/12 significance in music.  But even if he did not know about it, he still at least unconsciously expressed it, and as readers armed with this insight, we can see how such a correspondence helps to harmonize the amazing structure of the entire Commedia.       

1  Abreast, like oxen going in a yoke,
2  I with that heavy-laden soul went on,
3  As long as the sweet pedagogue permitted;

1  Di pari, come buoi che vanno a giogo,
2  m'andava io con quell' anima carca,
3  fin che 'l sofferse il dolce pedagogo.

4  But when he said, "Leave him, and onward pass,
5  For here 'tis good that with the sail and oars,
6  As much as may be, each push on his barque;"

4  Ma quando disse: “Lascia lui e varca;
5  ché qui è buono con l'ali e coi remi,
6  quantunque può, ciascun pinger sua barca”;

7  Upright, as walking wills it, I redressed
8  My person, notwithstanding that my thoughts
9  Remained within me downcast and abashed.

7  dritto sì come andar vuolsi rife'mi
8  con la persona, avvegna che i pensieri
9  mi rimanessero e chinati e scemi.

10  I had moved on, and followed willingly
11  The footsteps of my Master, and we both
12  Already showed how light of foot we were,

10  Io m'era mosso, e seguia volontieri
11  del mio maestro i passi, e amendue
12  già mostravam com' eravam leggeri;

13  When unto me he said: "Cast down thine eyes;
14  'Twere well for thee, to alleviate the way,
15  To look upon the bed beneath thy feet."

13  ed el mi disse: “Volgi li occhi in giùe:
14  buon ti sarà, per tranquillar la via,
15  veder lo letto de le piante tue.”

16  As, that some memory may exist of them,
17  Above the buried dead their tombs in earth
18  Bear sculptured on them what they were before;

16  Come, perché di lor memoria sia,
17  sovra i sepolti le tombe terragne
18  portan segnato quel ch'elli eran pria,

19  Whence often there we weep for them afresh,
20  From pricking of remembrance, which alone
21  To the compassionate doth set its spur;

19  onde lì molte volte si ripiagne
20  per la puntura de la rimembranza,
21  che solo a' pïi dà de le calcagne;

22  So saw I there, but of a better semblance
23  In point of artifice, with figures covered
24  Whate'er as pathway from the mount projects.

22  sì vid' io lì, ma di miglior sembianza
23  secondo l'artificio, figurato
24  quanto per via di fuor del monte avanza.

25  I saw that one who was created noble
26  More than all other creatures, down from heaven
27  Flaming with lightnings fall upon one side.

25  Vedea colui che fu nobil creato
26  più ch'altra creatura, giù dal cielo
27  folgoreggiando scender, da l'un lato.

28  I saw Briareus smitten by the dart
29  Celestial, lying on the other side,
30  Heavy upon the earth by mortal frost.

28  Vedëa Brïareo fitto dal telo
29  celestïal giacer, da l'altra parte,
30  grave a la terra per lo mortal gelo.

31  I saw Thymbraeus, Pallas saw, and Mars,
32  Still clad in armour round about their father,
33  Gaze at the scattered members of the giants.

31  Vedea Timbreo, vedea Pallade e Marte,
32  armati ancora, intorno al padre loro,
33  mirar le membra d'i Giganti sparte.

34  I saw, at foot of his great labour, Nimrod,
35  As if bewildered, looking at the people
36  Who had been proud with him in Sennaar.

34  Vedea Nembròt a piè del gran lavoro
35  quasi smarrito, e riguardar le genti
36  che 'n Sennaàr con lui superbi fuoro.

37  O Niobe! with what afflicted eyes
38  Thee I beheld upon the pathway traced,
39  Between thy seven and seven children slain!

37  O Nïobè, con che occhi dolenti
38  vedea io te segnata in su la strada,
39  tra sette e sette tuoi figliuoli spenti!

40  O Saul! how fallen upon thy proper sword
41  Didst thou appear there lifeless in Gilboa,
42  That felt thereafter neither rain nor dew!

40  O Saùl, come in su la propria spada
41  quivi parevi morto in Gelboè,
42  che poi non sentì pioggia né rugiada!

43  O mad Arachne! so I thee beheld
44  E'en then half spider, sad upon the shreds
45  Of fabric wrought in evil hour for thee!

43  O folle Aragne, sì vedea io te
44  già mezza ragna, trista in su li stracci
45  de l'opera che mal per te si fé.

46  O Rehoboam! no more seems to threaten
47  Thine image there; but full of consternation
48  A chariot bears it off, when none pursues!

46  O Roboàm, già non par che minacci
47  quivi 'l tuo segno; ma pien di spavento
48  nel porta un carro, sanza ch'altri il cacci.

49  Displayed moreo'er the adamantine pavement
50  How unto his own mother made Alcmaeon
51  Costly appear the luckless ornament;

49  Mostrava ancor lo duro pavimento
50  come Almeon a sua madre fé caro
51  parer lo sventurato addornamento.

52  Displayed how his own sons did throw themselves
53  Upon Sennacherib within the temple,
54  And how, he being dead, they left him there;

52  Mostrava come i figli si gittaro
53  sovra Sennacherìb dentro dal tempio,
54  e come, morto lui, quivi il lasciaro.

55  Displayed the ruin and the cruel carnage
56  That Tomyris wrought, when she to Cyrus said,
57  "Blood didst thou thirst for, and with blood I glut thee!"

55  Mostrava la ruina e 'l crudo scempio
56  che fé Tamiri, quando disse a Ciro:
57  “Sangue sitisti, e io di sangue t'empio.”

58  Displayed how routed fled the Assyrians
59  After that Holofernes had been slain,
60  And likewise the remainder of that slaughter.

58  Mostrava come in rotta si fuggiro
59  li Assiri, poi che fu morto Oloferne,
60  e anche le reliquie del martiro.

61  I saw there Troy in ashes and in caverns;
62  O Ilion! thee, how abject and debased,
63  Displayed the image that is there discerned!

61  Vedeva Troia in cenere e in caverne;
62  o Ilïón, come te basso e vile
63  mostrava il segno che lì si discerne!

64  Whoe'er of pencil master was or stile,
65  That could portray the shades and traits which there
66  Would cause each subtile genius to admire?

64  Qual di pennel fu maestro o di stile
65  che ritraesse l'ombre e ' tratti ch'ivi
66  mirar farieno uno ingegno sottile?

67  Dead seemed the dead, the living seemed alive;
68  Better than I saw not who saw the truth,
69  All that I trod upon while bowed I went.

67  Morti li morti e i vivi parean vivi:
68  non vide mei di me chi vide il vero,
69  quant' io calcai, fin che chinato givi.

70  Now wax ye proud, and on with looks uplifted,
71  Ye sons of Eve, and bow not down your faces
72  So that ye may behold your evil ways!

70  Or superbite, e via col viso altero,
71  figliuoli d'Eva, e non chinate il volto
72  sì che veggiate il vostro mal sentero!

73  More of the mount by us was now encompassed,
74  And far more spent the circuit of the sun,
75  Than had the mind preoccupied imagined,

73  Più era già per noi del monte vòlto
74  e del cammin del sole assai più speso
75  che non stimava l'animo non sciolto,

76  When he, who ever watchful in advance
77  Was going on, began: "Lift up thy head,
78  'Tis no more time to go thus meditating.

76  quando colui che sempre innanzi atteso
77  andava, cominciò: “Drizza la testa;
78  non è più tempo di gir sì sospeso.

79  Lo there an Angel who is making haste
80  To come towards us; lo, returning is
81  From service of the day the sixth handmaiden. 

79  Vedi colà un angel che s'appresta
80  per venir verso noi; vedi che torna
81  dal servigio del dì l'ancella sesta.

82  With reverence thine acts and looks adorn,
83  So that he may delight to speed us upward;
84  Think that this day will never dawn again."

82  Di reverenza il viso e li atti addorna,
83  sì che i diletti lo 'nvïarci in suso;
84  pensa che questo dì mai non raggiorna!”

85  I was familiar with his admonition
86  Ever to lose no time; so on this theme
87  He could not unto me speak covertly.

85  Io era ben del suo ammonir uso
86  pur di non perder tempo, sì che 'n quella
87  materia non potea parlarmi chiuso.

88  Towards us came the being beautiful
89  Vested in white, and in his countenance
90  Such as appears the tremulous morning star.

88  A noi venìa la creatura bella,
89  biancovestito e ne la faccia quale
90  par tremolando mattutina stella.

91  His arms he opened, and opened then his wings;
92  "Come," said he, "near at hand here are the steps,
93  And easy from henceforth is the ascent."

91  Le braccia aperse, e indi aperse l'ale;
92  disse: “Venite: qui son presso i gradi,
93  e agevolemente omai si sale.

94  At this announcement few are they who come!
95  O human creatures, born to soar aloft,
96  Why fall ye thus before a little wind?

94  A questo invito vegnon molto radi:
95  o gente umana, per volar sù nata,
96  perché a poco vento così cadi?”

97  He led us on to where the rock was cleft;
98  There smote upon my forehead with his wings,
99  Then a safe passage promised unto me.

97  Menocci ove la roccia era tagliata;
98  quivi mi batté l'ali per la fronte;
99  poi mi promise sicura l'andata.

100  As on the right hand, to ascend the mount
101  Where seated is the church that lordeth it
102  O'er the well-guided, above Rubaconte,

100  Come a man destra, per salire al monte
101  dove siede la chiesa che soggioga
102  la ben guidata sopra Rubaconte,

103  The bold abruptness of the ascent is broken
104  By stairways that were made there in the age
105  When still were safe the ledger and the stave,

103  si rompe del montar l'ardita foga
104  per le scalee che si fero ad etade
105  ch'era sicuro il quaderno e la doga;

106  E'en thus attempered is the bank which falls
107  Sheer downward from the second circle there;
108  But on this, side and that the high rock graze.

106  così s'allenta la ripa che cade
107  quivi ben ratta da l'altro girone;
108  ma quinci e quindi l'alta pietra rade.

109  As we were turning thitherward our persons,
110  "Beati pauperes spiritu," voices
111  Sang in such wise that speech could tell it not.

109  Noi volgendo ivi le nostre persone
110  “Beati pauperes spiritu!” voci
111  cantaron sì, che nol diria sermone.

112  Ah me! how different are these entrances
113  From the Infernal! for with anthems here
114  One enters, and below with wild laments.

112  Ahi quanto son diverse quelle foci
113  da l'infernali! ché quivi per canti
114  s'entra, e là giù per lamenti feroci.

115  We now were hunting up the sacred stairs,
116  And it appeared to me by far more easy
117  Than on the plain it had appeared before.

115  Già montavam su per li scaglion santi,
116  ed esser mi parea troppo più lieve
117  che per lo pian non mi parea davanti.

118  Whence I: "My Master, say, what heavy thing
119  Has been uplifted from me, so that hardly
120  Aught of fatigue is felt by me in walking?"

118  Ond' io: “Maestro, dì, qual cosa greve
119  levata s'è da me, che nulla quasi
120  per me fatica, andando, si riceve?”

121  He answered: "When the P's which have remained
122  Still on thy face almost obliterate
123  Shall wholly, as the first is, be erased,

121  Rispuose: “Quando i P che son rimasi
122  ancor nel volto tuo presso che stinti,
123  saranno, com' è l'un, del tutto rasi,

124  Thy feet will be so vanquished by good will,
125  That not alone they shall not feel fatigue,
126  But urging up will be to them delight."

124  fier li tuoi piè dal buon voler sì vinti,
125  che non pur non fatica sentiranno,
126  ma fia diletto loro esser sù pinti.”

127  Then did I even as they do who are going
128  With something on the head to them unknown,
129  Unless the signs of others make them doubt,

127  Allor fec' io come color che vanno
128  con cosa in capo non da lor saputa,
129  se non che ' cenni altrui sospecciar fanno;

130  Wherefore the hand to ascertain is helpful,
131  And seeks and finds, and doth fulfill the office
132  Which cannot be accomplished by the sight;

130  per che la mano ad accertar s'aiuta,
131  e cerca e truova e quello officio adempie
132  che non si può fornir per la veduta;

133  And with the fingers of the right hand spread
134  I found but six the letters, that had carved
134  Upon my temples he who bore the keys;

133  e con le dita de la destra scempie
134  trovai pur sei le lettere che 'ncise
135  quel da le chiavi a me sovra le tempie:

135  Upon beholding which my Leader smiled.

136  a che guardando, il mio duca sorrise.

Canto XIII
With each successive canto, the reader is confronted with a kind of all or nothing bet.  After having come so far, it would be easy to allow one’s self to adopt a mechanical procedure and just keep following the template that Dante has so expertly constructed without submitting oneself to the gravity of its moral implications at all. It is almost as if one is praying to be released from the odious task of self-examination, and whispering ‘Just let me continue this as an interesting intellectual exercise, and turn off this poem's pitiless, relentless light, which exposes every canker of my conscience."  Of course, these are just the kinds of things one should not do.  This text demands a sacrifice, the sacred gift of the total self, flaws and all, before it can work its transcendent power.  

Dante and Virgil have reached the summit of another stair, and although they travel on a mountain with a known conical shape, they appear to be rudderless, lost.  Lost in what way?  Surely not lost in the geographical sense: keep right, keep climbing, that's all the directions in that sense that they will ever need.  How then are they lost?  They are left to their own devices, here is what appears to be an uninhabited landscape, and as reader we realize that as far as the geography of the soul goes, it cannot be discovered without an incursion from powers concomitant with itself.  If the soul does not recognize its position in the domain of spirit, it is lost, lost in a dry and empty meditation.  The feet are able to move, but the force that motivates them is withdrawn.  Virgil here shows a bit of panic.  Why panic?  Because he senses that he and his charge are also traversing a temporal landscape, they cannot afford to waste time or the spirit will not make that spiritual rendezvous which (or rather who) promises fulfillment.  Virgil, a pagan, turns to the sun, and Dante, the poet, is pretty clear that in so doing, his teacher has reverted to an almost plant-like condition, following the only source he knows for spiritual guidance.  I find this sad.  There is a parody here of the gospels, Matthew 5:45: That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven; for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good — and Virgil has missed the allegory and taken the sun for the spirit animating the sun.  His miss is good as a mile.  He fears that they do not have the time to wait for people, i.e., entities, souls to guide them, and he does all he knows to do: follow the light.  Not a bad guess, but not a guess, I think, that could ever lead to transcendence.  And yet, his effort is rewarded.  As the protagonists proceed they hear disembodied voices rushing by them.

Mary's words at the wedding of Canaan.  "They have no wine."  The pagan voice of Pylades, saying "I am Orestes," attempting to take the blame and the punishment for his friend.  And after this, just when the aspirant asks: What voices are these?  The voice of Jesus, the one voice that Virgil did not recognize in his life, and should not be able to identify here, says (line 36): “Amate da cui male aveste.”  (Love those who've done you evil.).  Here, we are blind, but here we hear, i.e., we have ears to hear, and these words do what the sunlight could not do.  They open our eyes.  They invite us to a wedding, a marriage of souls, in an ensouled world.  The invitation and Dante's question reawaken Virgil to his role as teacher and guide, and he says a curious, self-contradicting thing: That the scourge of punishment here is drawn from love.  Here we meet souls who are so insubstantial that they almost merge into the background — shades, who not only cannot see, but are themselves difficult to see.  They and the landscape that has swallowed them are the color of a bruise.  Wearing sackcloth, their smallest movement, lacerates, irritates, and calls them to remembrance of their sin.  They must move en masse, the blind literally leading the blind, their eyes sewn shut, but not so tightly that their tears do not find agonizing passage through the sutures.  The text compares them to wild falcons, whose rapacious nature cannot be tamed unless they are blinded, because everything they see reflexively lures them to attack.  That which we see here, however, could never be anything to incite our envy, and, unlike those punished in hell, their fate does not provoke our scorn, but rather our pity — our piety.  Now, other cries arise: "Mary pray for us," and then comes a litany of saints.  The manna of prayer, which has been the insistent prescription for pain throughout the Purgatorio, spontaneously sounds here, the very stones seeming to cry out, just as Jesus promised that they would.  The first words that Dante addresses to these spirits are literally enlightening, for he reminds them of their salvation, reminds them that they have been chosen to be among the illuminated, and that it is only a continuing snare of temporality which has tricked them into believing they are blind.  What a revelation!  Their eyes are blind but the sole care of their faith is light!  Is it possible that even in this piteous condition, blind, stone-like, helpless, tortured in sackcloth, that they are actually following that inner sun which Virgil mistook in the outer?  (There is a little masterful aside here — lines 79 - 84 — wherein Dante, the aspirant, places himself between the wall of the mountain that almost completely camouflages the penitents, and Virgil, reasonable, pagan, beloved Virgil, who is there to protect his charge from tumbling into the void.  It makes me think of the Blakean maxim: " ... reason is the bound or outward circumference of energy ... " ).

Now we come to certain expressions in the text which tell us that we have indeed experienced a moral elevation, that the spirits here, although suffering purgation for their own personal transgressions, now have experienced a broadening of perspective, vis à vis the question: Who am I?  When Dante asks in versus 91-93 if there be any shades in this place who are Latina, his whole question being referential to himself, his condition, his dwelling place on earth, a voice corrects him.  This is a female voice, a shift that foreshadows the females that yet dwell above the aspirant on his ascent, and recalls both the original intervention of Beatrice through Saint Lucy that began his journey, and also the voice of Mary at the beginning of this canto, when she, from concern for the wedding party, informs her son: "They have no wine."  Here, this shade corrects Dante by telling him that those on Earth who identify themselves with a specific city, country, language or lineage are mistaken.  All are in fact are but pilgrims, wandering exiles in the physical domain.   In truth, all are united as the citizens of the New Jerusalem in heaven or in the seat of Peter, Rome, the earthly Jerusalem.  A momentous shift in the placement of identity has occurred, and it is against this background that this shade, Sapia, a lady from Siena, tells a story that illustrates the madness which manifests when a person feels an exile while yet living in their own country.  Sapia, who points out that her name ironically means "wisdom," is the exemplar of this folly.  In a distasteful act of Schadenfreude she exalts when she sees her countrymen defeated in battle, the sight of their smoking corpses and ignominious route bringing her what is literally referred to as a kind of birdbrained squawk of joy.  One ray of false spring sunshine convincing her that her personal winter has ended, and she need not fear anything of God's or anyone else's disfavor.  This is the nadir of her fall, because the comb-seller, Peter, a local Sienese saint, prays for her, and reverses her downward trajectory, his prayer opening her inner eyes to her blindness.  From Virgil's prayer to the sun, to the unseen, disembodied voices, to the difficulty of even seeing the blind penitents who blend into the livid landscape, this entire canto is a flickering play of seeing, not seeing, light and blindness.  And this flickering quality continues to the very last verses, wherein Sapia tells of the folly of her countrymen seeking to swell their power and importance by giving landlocked Siena a seaport, and by fruitlessly seeking a non-existent underground river beneath their city.  Are Sapia's last words ironic, an unpurged example of her envy?  Or does she now have genuine concern for the spiritual life of her countrymen?  A moment before she has demonstrated her unselfishness by expressing true delight in Dante's blessedness, and then immediately following she refers to the vanity of her countrymen.  The shift in tone is a rapid flickering.  Has she suddenly changed from magnanimous to carping?  The answer to this question depends entirely upon the tone by which the reader imagines how her words are spoken.  In brief, by how much the reader's own envious nature has been purged.  This brings us to an obvious but often overlooked truth.  That is, the interpretation, the reading, of any text depends upon the spiritual condition of its reader, and this is most apparent when one hears the interpretation of scripture, the same verses suggesting such things as vengeance, murder, and the justification for slavery and exclusion to some, yet forgiveness, salvation, freedom, and inclusion to others.  In every text, we only read ourselves.       

1  We were upon the summit of the stairs,
2  Where for the second time is cut away
3  The mountain, which ascending shriveth all.

1  Noi eravamo al sommo de la scala,
2  dove secondamente si risega
3  lo monte che salendo altrui dismala.

4  There in like manner doth a cornice bind
5  The hill all round about, as does the first,
6  Save that its arc more suddenly is curved.

4  Ivi così una cornice lega
5  dintorno il poggio, come la primaia;
6  se non che l'arco suo più tosto piega.

7  Shade is there none, nor sculpture that appears;
8  So seems the bank, and so the road seems smooth,
9  With but the livid colour of the stone.

7  Ombra non lì è né segno che si paia:
8  parsi la ripa e parsi la via schietta
9  col livido color de la petraia.

10  "If to inquire we wait for people here,"
11  The Poet said, "I fear that peradventure
12  Too much delay will our election have."

10  “Se qui per dimandar gente s'aspetta,”
11  ragionava il poeta, “io temo forse
12  che troppo avrà d'indugio nostra eletta.”

13  Then steadfast on the sun his eyes he fixed,
14  Made his right side the centre of his motion,
15  And turned the left part of himself about.

13  Poi fisamente al sole li occhi porse;
14  fece del destro lato a muover centro,
15  e la sinistra parte di sé torse.

16  "O thou sweet light! with trust in whom I enter
17  Upon this novel journey, do thou lead us,"
18  Said he, "as one within here should be led.

16  “O dolce lume a cui fidanza i' entro
17  per lo novo cammin, tu ne conduci,”
18  dicea, “come condur si vuol quinc' entro.

19  Thou warmest the world, thou shinest over it;
20  If other reason prompt not otherwise,
21  Thy rays should evermore our leaders be!"

19  Tu scaldi il mondo, tu sovr' esso luci;
20  s'altra ragione in contrario non ponta,
21  esser dien sempre li tuoi raggi duci.”

22  As much as here is counted for a mile,
23  So much already there had we advanced
24  In little time, by dint of ready will;

22  Quanto di qua per un migliaio si conta,
23  tanto di là eravam noi già iti,
24  con poco tempo, per la voglia pronta;

25  And tow'rds us there were heard to fly, albeit
26  They were not visible, spirits uttering
27  Unto Love's table courteous invitations,

25  e verso noi volar furon sentiti,
26  non però visti, spiriti parlando
27  a la mensa d'amor cortesi inviti.

28  The first voice that passed onward in its flight,
29  "Vinum non habent," said in accents loud,
30  And went reiterating it behind us.

28  La prima voce che passò volando
29  “Vinum non habent” altamente disse,
30  e dietro a noi l'andò reïterando.

31  And ere it wholly grew inaudible
32  Because of distance, passed another, crying,
33  "I am Orestes!" and it also stayed not.

31  E prima che del tutto non si udisse
32  per allungarsi, un'altra “I' sono Oreste”
33  passò gridando, e anco non s'affisse.

34  "O," said I, "Father, these, what voices are they?"
35   And even as I asked, behold the third,
36  Saying: "Love those from whom ye have had evil!"

34  “Oh!” diss' io, “padre, che voci son queste?”
35  E com' io domandai, ecco la terza
36  dicendo: “Amate da cui male aveste.”

37  And the good Master said: "This circle scourges
38  The sin of envy, and on that account
39  Are drawn from love the lashes of the scourge.

37  E 'l buon maestro: “Questo cinghio sferza
38  la colpa de la invidia, e però sono
39  tratte d'amor le corde de la ferza.

40  The bridle of another sound shall be;
41  I think that thou wilt hear it, as I judge,
42  Before thou comest to the Pass of Pardon.

40  Lo fren vuol esser del contrario suono;
41  credo che l'udirai, per mio avviso,
42  prima che giunghi al passo del perdono.

43  But fix thine eyes athwart the air right steadfast,
44  And people thou wilt see before us sitting,
45  And each one close against the cliff is seated."

43  Ma ficca li occhi per l'aere ben fiso,
44  e vedrai gente innanzi a noi sedersi,
45  e ciascun è lungo la grotta assiso.”

46  Then wider than at first mine eyes I opened;
47  I looked before me, and saw shades with mantles
48   Not from the colour of the stone diverse.

46  Allora più che prima li occhi apersi;
47  guarda'mi innanzi, e vidi ombre con manti
48  al color de la pietra non diversi.

49  And when we were a little farther onward,
50  I heard a cry of, "Mary, pray for us!"
51  A cry of, "Michael, Peter, and all Saints!"

49  E poi che fummo un poco più avanti,
50  udia gridar: “Maria òra per noi”:
51  gridar “Michele” e “Pietro” e “Tutti santi.”

52  I do not think there walketh still on earth
53  A man so hard, that he would not be pierced
54  With pity at what afterward I saw.

52  Non credo che per terra vada ancoi
53  omo sì duro, che non fosse punto
54  per compassion di quel ch'i' vidi poi;

55  For when I had approached so near to them
56  That manifest to me their acts became,
57  Drained was I at the eyes by heavy grief.

55  ché, quando fui sì presso di lor giunto,
56  che li atti loro a me venivan certi,
57  per li occhi fui di grave dolor munto.

58  Covered with sackcloth vile they seemed to me,
59  And one sustained the other with his shoulder,
60  And all of them were by the bank sustained.

58  Di vil ciliccio mi parean coperti,
59  e l'un sofferia l'altro con la spalla,
60  e tutti da la ripa eran sofferti.

61  Thus do the blind, in want of livelihood,
62  Stand at the doors of churches asking alms,
63  And one upon another leans his head,

61  Così li ciechi a cui la roba falla,
62  stanno a' perdoni a chieder lor bisogna,
63  e l'uno il capo sopra l'altro avvalla,

64  So that in others pity soon may rise,
65  Not only at the accent of their words,
66  But at their aspect, which no less implores.

64  perché 'n altrui pietà tosto si pogna,
65  non pur per lo sonar de le parole,
66  ma per la vista che non meno agogna.

67  And as unto the blind the sun comes not,
68  So to the shades, of whom just now I spake,
69  Heaven's light will not be bounteous of itself;

67  E come a li orbi non approda il sole,
68  così a l'ombre quivi, ond' io parlo ora,
69  luce del ciel di sé largir non vole;

70  For all their lids an iron wire transpierces,
71  And sews them up, as to a sparhawk wild
72  Is done, because it will not quiet stay.

70  ché a tutti un fil di ferro i cigli fóra
71  e cusce sì, come a sparvier selvaggio
72  si fa però che queto non dimora.

73  To me it seemed, in passing, to do outrage,
74  Seeing the others without being seen;
75  Wherefore I turned me to my counsel sage.

73  A me pareva, andando, fare oltraggio,
74  veggendo altrui, non essendo veduto:
75  per ch'io mi volsi al mio consiglio saggio.

76  Well knew he what the mute one wished to say,
77  And therefore waited not for my demand,
78  But said: "Speak, and be brief, and to the point."

76  Ben sapev' ei che volea dir lo muto;
77  e però non attese mia dimanda,
78  ma disse: “Parla, e sie breve e arguto.”

79  I had Virgilius upon that side
80  Of the embankment from which one may fall,
81  Since by no border 'tis engarlanded;

79  Virgilio mi venìa da quella banda
80  de la cornice onde cader si puote,
81  perché da nulla sponda s'inghirlanda;

82  Upon the other side of me I had
83  The shades devout, who through the horrible seam
84  Pressed out the tears so that they bathed their cheeks.

82  da l'altra parte m'eran le divote
83  ombre, che per l'orribile costura
84  premevan sì, che bagnavan le gote.

85  To them I turned me, and, "O people, certain,"
86  Began I, "of beholding the high light,
87  Which your desire has solely in its care,

85  Volsimi a loro e: “O gente sicura,”
86  incominciai, “di veder l'alto lume
87   che 'l disio vostro solo ha in sua cura,

88  So may grace speedily dissolve the scum
89  Upon your consciences, that limpidly
90  Through them descend the river of the mind,

88  se tosto grazia resolva le schiume
89  di vostra coscïenza sì che chiaro
90  per essa scenda de la mente il fiume,

91  Tell me, for dear 'twill be to me and gracious,
92  If any soul among you here is Latian,
93  And 'twill perchance be good for him I learn it."

91  ditemi, ché mi fia grazioso e caro,
92  s'anima è qui tra voi che sia latina;
93  e forse lei sarà buon s'i' l'apparo.”

94  "O brother mine, each one is citizen
95  Of one true city; but thy meaning is,
96  Who may have lived in Italy a pilgrim."

94  “O frate mio, ciascuna è cittadina
95  d'una vera città; ma tu vuo' dire
96  che vivesse in Italia peregrina.”

97  By way of answer this I seemed to hear
98  A little farther on than where I stood,
99  Whereat I made myself still nearer heard.

97  Questo mi parve per risposta udire
98  più innanzi alquanto che là dov' io stava,
99  ond' io mi feci ancor più là sentire.
100  Among the rest I saw a shade that waited
101  In aspect, and should any one ask how,
102  Its chin it lifted upward like a blind man.
100  Tra l'altre vidi un'ombra ch'aspettava
101  in vista; e se volesse alcun dir “Come?”
102  lo mento a guisa d'orbo in sù levava.
103  "Spirit," I said, "who stoopest to ascend,
104  If thou art he who did reply to me,
105  Make thyself known to me by place or name."
103  “Spirto,” diss' io, “che per salir ti dome,
104  se tu se' quelli che mi rispondesti,
105  fammiti conto o per luogo o per nome.”
106  "Sienese was I," it replied, "and with
107  The others here recleanse my guilty life,
108  Weeping to Him to lend himself to us.
106  “Io fui sanese,” rispuose, “e con questi
107  altri rimendo qui la vita ria,
108  lagrimando a colui che sé ne presti.
109  Sapient I was not, although I Sapia
110  Was called, and I was at another's harm
111  More happy far than at my own good fortune.
109  Savia non fui, avvegna che Sapìa
110  fossi chiamata, e fui de li altrui danni
111  più lieta assai che di ventura mia.
112  And that thou mayst not think that I deceive thee,
113  Hear if I was as foolish as I tell thee.
114  The arc already of my years descending,
112  E perché tu non creda ch'io t'inganni,
113  odi s'i' fui, com' io ti dico, folle,
114  già discendendo l'arco d'i miei anni.
115  My fellow-citizens near unto Colle
116  Were joined in battle with their adversaries,
117  And I was praying God for what he willed.
115  Eran li cittadin miei presso a Colle
116  in campo giunti co' loro avversari,
117  e io pregava Iddio di quel ch'e' volle.
118  Routed were they, and turned into the bitter
119  Passes of flight; and I, the chase beholding,
120  A joy received unequalled by all others;
118  Rotti fuor quivi e vòlti ne li amari
119  passi di fuga; e veggendo la caccia,
120  letizia presi a tutte altre dispari,
121  So that I lifted upward my bold face
122  Crying to God, 'Henceforth I fear thee not,'
123  As did the blackbird at the little sunshine.
121  tanto ch'io volsi in sù l'ardita faccia,
122  gridando a Dio: 'Omai più non ti temo!'
123  come fé 'l merlo per poca bonaccia.
124  Peace I desired with God at the extreme
125  Of my existence, and as yet would not
126  My debt have been by penitence discharged,
124  Pace volli con Dio in su lo stremo
125  de la mia vita; e ancor non sarebbe
126  lo mio dover per penitenza scemo,
127  Had it not been that in remembrance held me
128  Pier Pettignano in his holy prayers,
129  Who out of charity was grieved for me.
127  se ciò non fosse, ch'a memoria m'ebbe
128  Pier Pettinaio in sue sante orazioni,
129  a cui di me per caritate increbbe.
130  But who art thou, that into our conditions
131  Questioning goest, and hast thine eyes unbound
132  As I believe, and breathing dost discourse?"
130  Ma tu chi se', che nostre condizioni
131  vai dimandando, e porti li occhi sciolti,
132  sì com' io credo, e spirando ragioni?”
133  "Mine eyes," I said, "will yet be here ta'en from me,
134   But for short space; for small is the offence
135   Committed by their being turned with envy.
133  “Li occhi,” diss' io, “mi fieno ancor qui tolti,
134  ma picciol tempo, ché poca è l'offesa
135  fatta per esser con invidia vòlti.
136  Far greater is the fear, wherein suspended
137  My soul is, of the torment underneath,
138  For even now the load down there weighs on me."
136  Troppa è più la paura ond' è sospesa
137  l'anima mia del tormento di sotto,
138  che già lo 'ncarco di là giù mi pesa.”
139  And she to me: "Who led thee, then, among us
140  Up here, if to return below thou thinkest?"
141  And I: "He who is with me, and speaks not;
139  Ed ella a me: “Chi t'ha dunque condotto
140  qua sù tra noi, se giù ritornar credi?”
141  E io: “Costui ch'è meco e non fa motto.
142  And living am I; therefore ask of me,
144  Spirit elect, if thou wouldst have me move
145  O'er yonder yet my mortal feet for thee."
142  E vivo sono; e però mi richiedi,
143  spirito eletto, se tu vuo' ch'i' mova
144 di là per te ancor li mortai piedi.”
145  "O, this is such a novel thing to hear,"
146  She answered, "that great sign it is God loves thee;
147  Therefore with prayer of thine sometimes assist me.
145  “Oh, questa è a udir sì cosa nuova,”
146  rispuose, “che gran segno è che Dio t'ami;
147  però col priego tuo talor mi giova.
148  And I implore, by what thou most desirest,
149  If e'er thou treadest the soil of Tuscany,
150  Well with my kindred reinstate my fame.
148  E cheggioti, per quel che tu più brami,
149  se mai calchi la terra di Toscana,
150  che a' miei propinqui tu ben mi rinfami.
151  Them wilt thou see among that people vain
152  Who hope in Talamone, and will lose there
153  More hope than in discovering the Diana;
151  Tu li vedrai tra quella gente vana
152  che spera in Talamone, e perderagli
153  più di speranza ch'a trovar la Diana;
154  But there still more the admirals will lose."
154  ma più vi perderanno li ammiragli.”
Canto XIV
We are protected — or we imagine we are protected — from Dante's text by its reputation, by its centuries of commentary, by the distance that our attitudes afford us about poetry as an aesthetic experience, which far from bringing us closer to the affairs of life and of the soul, allows us the space to intellectually consider what should be grappled with with the same intensity with which a sleepless person grapples with a 3 a.m. panic attack or an addict with the symptoms of drug withdrawal.  But as we deeply study the poem, at some point it dawns on us that this text is a kind of in extremis challenge: beautiful, intricately woven, stubbornly insistent on what strikes us as an excursion into a hyperdimensional reality, its mere words, mouth-sounds, letter-shapes, elevating it far beyond the usual weight we are accustomed to give to a product of the imagination.  Again and again, the reader feels haunted by the suspicion that her's or his' own version of reality is but a pale projection, and that whatever Dante is asking us to accept is more real than any fantasy.  Rather it seems like some unique species of dream collected from millions of sleepers over thousands of years, and we are one of those dreamers, still in the dream, but with the illusion that we are awake, and all this can be brushed off as the contents of a book.  We do not grasp that this book is a centuries-old body which has incorporated our experience as readers into its own organ functioning.  We are enlivened and engrossed in this work, one moment becoming a bit of its heart tissue, in the next, a bit of its lung, or its intestine.  Dante's poem incorporates us as a part of its life, and by so doing it becomes a necessary part of our own.  

Canto XIV of the Purgatorio does not so much begin as it elides into its domain as a subtle overtone, two shades overhearing the aspirant even as he them.  And we succumb, because we realize that we have been given instructions on how to read the poem, i.e., as an echo from another world calling this world to account, its shades making Earth, even as they speak of it, shimmer, not as so many physical things and people, but as something a bit tainted by unreality, the projection of a host of cruel and deluded maniacs who have forgotten what IS and are thereby left to scrap over what is not.  The characters of these two, one Guido del Duca, and one Rinieri da Caboli, both blind, and huddled together in sackcloth, are finely drawn.  Guido is abrupt, easily annoyed, a person of whom we might say: He does not suffer fools gladly.  While Rinieri is kinder, more tentative, retiring, dependent, courteous.  Guido was in life a Ghibelline, Rinieri, a Guelph, and both are here to purge the sin of Envy.   These two factions were the splits which ignited men's passions in Dante's historical times, the abstract beasts, whose perpetual conflicts were paid out in human lives and environmental destruction.  Every age has their own versions of them, and they are the writ large double-binds of the body politic of each individual's irreconcilable psychic splits.  They pose questions of identity — who am I? — and authority — how should I live?  For all the factions in Dante's time the first question — who am I — was embedded in family and in hereditary lines, in City, or citizenship allegiances, and in language and custom.  The second question — how should I live? — was embedded in either political or family loyalties in the case of the Ghibellines, or under the authority of a spiritual hierarchy and its moral teachings, as the Guelph party would have it.  The offices of Ghibellines were either hereditary, passed down through blood lineages or usurped by force of arms, and those of the papacy ostensibly through moral and spiritual merit, but in practice fought out among family and political rivals.  If all this seems confusing, it should, because conflicts, whether internal or external, run a pell-mell course without any logical consistency, and it is this violent course that much of the Commedia is meant to expose, curb, and ultimately transcend.  Dante's own position, and the personal tragedy of his nomadic exile, bounced from one party to another, to come to rest in neither.   The figure of Cato, in the Purgatorio, both a pagan and a suicide, seems to have been saved by his act of extreme renunciation.  And this appears to be Dante's position: renounce all factionalism.  By inclination he seems to have favored the Ghibelline position on authority.  He would render unto Caesar what is Caesar’s, keeping the secular powers separate from the spiritual ones, a separation of Church and State, to put it in contemporary American parlance.  The idea being that political authority would hopelessly corrupt a spiritual authority, and that politics and economics were things of this fallen world, best influenced, but not controlled by a spiritual power, morality in the former sphere being relative, in the latter, absolute.  The one demands only loyalty, but the other devotion.  That's Dante's Ghibelline-like position reflected in the very first cantos of the Inferno, which prophesize a secular ruler uniting a fractured Italy.  However, through family connections, Dante was also attached to the Guelph party, and his consistent idea is that man's life ultimately lies under a spiritual auspices.  If we were to graph his ideal of the flow of power it might look like this:

God/Christ
I
Pope
I
Emperor or Republic
I
People

But, if this vastly simplified graph seems straightforward, the actual achievement of such a power/authority configuration is almost hopelessly convoluted.  This dichotomy is reflected in the simple, numerical construction of a poem whose internal metaphors are an almost chaotic whirl of reflecting and refracting complexity, a swirl of verbal vapors and liquids held in check by the rigid container of a formal design.  One of the greatest, and almost unique, hallmarks of Dante's genius is his ability to reconcile these irreconcilable positions in the overall body of his poem.

This canto as it develops, as are so many of the cantos of the poem, is in some sense a litany of names, and most of these names are strewn throughout the public records of his day.  Their fame becomes the extension of their identity through time, thus their names resound by virtue of the fact that they have become texts, that is to say, enduring as communal memory.  When Dante says to Guido and Rinieri that his name as yet (that prideful "ancor" in line 21) is not renowned, he means that there is not much text by which his existence might be known.  In this sense, as one orphaned young, an exile, a minor member of a declining aristocratic family, he has nothing to recommend him or preserve his existence in a name.  The poem, of course, is his enormously successful rectification of those handicaps.  For he has not only threaded his own name throughout the centuries' tapestry, but also the names of those whom he includes in his text.  Those people, well-known in his own time, would be utterly forgotten in ours, if he had not cursed or praised them in his work.  He preserves people like Guido or Rinieri in the amber of his verses, and even through the persistently used device of periphrasis, he has enticed his readers in subsequent generations to ferret out the significance of not just a name, but an identity.  Their place in his poem assured them a degree of fame, and given the large number of shades throughout the work who plead for exactly that, Dante is as magnanimous as the Deity in that the sun of his verses shines equally on the just and unjust.  But names in this canto flicker in and out of obscurity.  We have to play hide and seek with them, guess at them, a circumstance which emphasizes their arbitrary necessity.  We even have to guess the name of the Arno, the river itself, taking on multiplicitous identities, its first being that of one ashamed, then it is seen as a serpentining breeder of humans, who, like those cursed by Circe, have degenerated to the condition of beasts.  And of course, as a serpent, it recalls that primal, prideful Serpent: Lucifer.  More hide and seek, thesis and antithesis, shame and pride, in the ever-shifting, elusive, and illusory reflections of its waters.  Dante also points out how the river is part of the larger water cycle, springing from Earth at its mountain source, returning to the sea, and then rising as vapors again, only to fall to Earth again as rain.  He refers to this cycle as the burdened of debt, which must be perpetually repaid, this cycle becoming a metaphor for the endless round of crime and retributive justice, which is to say: the condition of nature and natural man.  All this makes the river an image of mutability and necessity, and its appearance near the beginning of the canto is contrasted with the wheeling eternal stars which conclude it.  The Arno's course breeds, in successive order, hogs, whelps, dogs, wolves, foxes from the men who infest its banks.  

This canto's subject is Envy, which is portrayed by Dante as a kind of schadenfreude, i.e., delight in the misery of others.  This definition of Envy we have also seen in the previous canto, but here there is a crucial difference.  In Canto XIII, Sapia's schadenfreude is a sin because she takes delight in the defeat of her fellow citizens.  Here, in Canto XIV, Guido's apostrophe against the "animals" inhabiting the banks of the Arno is more like the "correct" attitude we were to have at the sufferings of the sinners in Hell.  These "animals" deserve whatever insults we can make of their names and fame.  In fact, the names of the cities are suppressed, and only their geographical domains referred to.  Coupled with this degeneration of humans into beasts, is the degeneration of families and the environment itself, the decadent descendant of a once noble family (Rinieri's grandson, Fulcieri) carrying out such depredations that not only is he covered with his victims' blood, but he has denuded the very trees of their leaves and left the forest so barren that it will not recover in a thousand years.

Note: Dante derived his understanding of Envy from St. Augustine.  Envy is sorrow at another's joy, or joy at another's sorrow.  The virtues countering it are pity (compassion) for another's sorrow, and, charity, joy shared with another.  Of this latter case, Guido refers to it when he says virtue can only come from that which can be shared.

Just as the canto began by the blind sinners overhearing voices, and the sinners, unseen at first, overheard by the protagonists, it also ends with disembodied voices.  One, the Biblical Cain, and the other, the pagan Aglauros.  These later voices, the negative exemplars of Envy, however, are far from subtle.  They are thunderclaps, so loud they hurt the ears, and they prompt the marvelous spate of multivalent metaphors at the end of the canto, which include the bridling of a wild horse, a bait to poison a bird, the devil's parodic shepard's hook which too easily snares men, the lure used to call back a hunting falcon, and finally the wheeling, eternal stars, ignored by humans, who remain fixated, in spite of the splendors above them, as do the speakers in this canto, on Earthly squalor.

(One final observation: In the last canto, the aspirant, Dante, exhibits pity when viewing the envious with their eyes sutured shut, here he only observes, and it is Virgil, in the final verses, who shows emotion.  Is Dante exhibiting here the beginnings of what many spiritual teachers call "witness consciousness?"  If so, one could read this as another indication that he is progressing on his path towards transcendence.)       
 
1  "Who is this one that goes about our mountain,
2  Or ever Death has given him power of flight,
3  And opes his eyes and shuts them at his will?"
1  “Chi è costui che 'l nostro monte cerchia
2  prima che morte li abbia dato il volo,
3  e apre li occhi a sua voglia e coverchia?”
4  "I know not who, but know he's not alone;
5  Ask him thyself, for thou art nearer to him,
6  And gently, so that he may speak, accost him."
4  “Non so chi sia, ma so ch'e' non è solo;
5  domandal tu che più li t'avvicini,
6  e dolcemente, sì che parli, acco'lo.”
7  Thus did two spirits, leaning tow'rds each other,
8  Discourse about me there on the right hand;
9  Then held supine their faces to address me.
7  Così due spirti, l'uno a l'altro chini,
8  ragionavan di me ivi a man dritta;
9  poi fer li visi, per dirmi, supini;
10  And said the one: "O soul, that, fastened still
11  Within the body, tow'rds the heaven art going,
12  For charity console us, and declare
10  e disse l'uno: “O anima che fitta
11  nel corpo ancora inver' lo ciel ten vai,
12  per carità ne consola e ne ditta
13  Whence comest and who art thou; for thou mak'st us
14  As much to marvel at this grace of thine
15  As must a thing that never yet has been."
13  onde vieni e chi se'; ché tu ne fai
14  tanto maravigliar de la tua grazia,
15  quanto vuol cosa che non fu più mai.”
16  And I: "Through midst of Tuscany there wanders
17  A streamlet that is born in Falterona,
18  And not a hundred miles of course suffice it;
16  E io: “Per mezza Toscana si spazia
17  un fiumicel che nasce in Falterona,
18  e cento miglia di corso nol sazia.
19  From thereupon do I this body bring.
20  To tell you who I am were speech in vain,
21  Because my name as yet makes no great noise."
19  Di sovr' esso rech' io questa persona:
20  dirvi ch'i' sia, saria parlare indarno,
21  ché 'l nome mio ancor molto non suona.”
22  "If well thy meaning I can penetrate
23  With intellect of mine," then answered me
24  He who first spake, "thou speakest of the Arno."
22  “Se ben lo 'ntendimento tuo accarno
23  con lo 'ntelletto,” allora mi rispuose
24  quei che diceva pria, “tu parli d'Arno.”
25  And said the other to him: "Why concealed
26  This one the appellation of that river,
27  Even as a man doth of things horrible?"
25  E l'altro disse lui: “Perché nascose
26  questi il vocabol di quella riviera,
27  pur com' om fa de l'orribili cose?”
28  And thus the shade that questioned was of this
29  Himself acquitted: "I know not; but truly
30  'Tis fit the name of such a valley peris
28  E l'ombra che di ciò domandata era,
29  si sdebitò così: “Non so; ma degno
30  ben è che 'l nome di tal valle pèra;
31  For from its fountain-head (where is so pregnant
32  The Alpine mountain whence is cleft Peloro
33  That in few places it that mark surpasses)
31  ché dal principio suo, ov' è sì pregno
32  l'alpestro monte ond' è tronco Peloro,
33  che 'n pochi luoghi passa oltra quel segno,
34  To where it yields itself in restoration
35  Of what the heaven doth of the sea dry up,
36  Whence have the rivers that which goes with them,
34  infin là 've si rende per ristoro
35  di quel che 'l ciel de la marina asciuga,
36  ond' hanno i fiumi ciò che va con loro,
37  Virtue is like an enemy avoided
38  By all, as is a serpent, through misfortune
39  Of place, or through bad habit that impels them;
37  vertù così per nimica si fuga
38  da tutti come biscia, o per sventura
39  del luogo, o per mal uso che li fruga:
40  On which account have so transformed their nature
41  The dwellers in that miserable valley,
42  It seems that Circe had them in her pasture.
40  ond' hanno sì mutata lor natura
41  li abitator de la misera valle,
42  che par che Circe li avesse in pastura.
43  'Mid ugly swine, of acorns worthier
44  Than other food for human use created,
45  It first directeth its impoverished way.
43  Tra brutti porci, più degni di galle
44  che d'altro cibo fatto in uman uso,
45  dirizza prima il suo povero calle.
46  Curs findeth it thereafter, coming downward,
47  More snarling than their puissance demands,
48  And turns from them disdainfully its muzzle.
46  Botoli trova poi, venendo giuso,
47  ringhiosi più che non chiede lor possa,
48  e da lor disdegnosa torce il muso.
49  It goes on falling, and the more it grows,
50  The more it finds the dogs becoming wolves,
51  This maledict and misadventurous ditch.
49  Vassi caggendo; e quant ella più 'ngrossa,
50  tanto più trova di can farsi lupi
51  la maladetta e sventurata fossa.
52  Descended then through many a hollow gulf,
53  It finds the foxes so replete with fraud,
54  They fear no cunning that may master them.
52  Discesa poi per più pelaghi cupi,
53  trova le volpi sì piene di froda,
54  che non temono ingegno che le occùpi.
55  Nor will I cease because another hears me;
56  And well 'twill be for him, if still he mind him
57  Of what a truthful spirit to me unravels.
55  Né lascerò di dir perch' altri m'oda;
56  e buon sarà costui, s'ancor s'ammenta
57  di ciò che vero spirto mi disnoda.
58  Thy grandson I behold, who doth become
59  A hunter of those wolves upon the bank
60  Of the wild stream, and terrifies them all.
58  Io veggio tuo nepote che diventa
59  cacciator di quei lupi in su la riva
60  del fiero fiume, e tutti li sgomenta.
61  He sells their flesh, it being yet alive;
62  Thereafter slaughters them like ancient beeves;
63  Many of life, himself of praise, deprives.
61  Vende la carne loro essendo viva;
62  poscia li ancide come antica belva;
63  molti di vita e sé di pregio priva.
64  Blood-stained he issues from the dismal forest;
65  He leaves it such, a thousand years from now
66  In its primeval state 'tis not re-wooded."
64  Sanguinoso esce de la trista selva;
65  lasciala tal, che di qui a mille anni
66  ne lo stato primaio non si rinselva.”
67  As at the announcement of impending ills
68  The face of him who listens is disturbed,
69  From whate'er side the peril seize upon him;
67  Com' a l'annunzio di dogliosi danni
68  si turba il viso di colui ch'ascolta,
69 da qual che parte il periglio l'assanni,
70  So I beheld that other soul, which stood
71  Turned round to listen, grow disturbed and sad,
72  When it had gathered to itself the word.
70  così vid' io l'altr' anima, che volta
71  stava a udir, turbarsi e farsi trista,
72  poi ch'ebbe la parola a sé raccolta.
73  The speech of one and aspect of the other
74  Had me desirous made to know their names,
75  And question mixed with prayers I made thereof,
73 Lo dir de l'una e de l'altra la vista
74  mi fer voglioso di saper lor nomi,
75  e dimanda ne fei con prieghi mista;
76  Whereat the spirit which first spake to me
77  Began again: "Thou wishest I should bring me
78  To do for thee what thou'lt not do for me;
76  per che lo spirto che di pria parlòmi
77  ricominciò: “Tu vuo' ch'io mi deduca
78  nel fare a te ciò che tu far non vuo'mi.
79  But since God willeth that in thee shine forth
80  Such grace of his, I'll not be chary with thee;
81  Know, then, that I Guido del Duca am.
79  Ma da che Dio in te vuol che traluca
80  tanto sua grazia, non ti sarò scarso;
81  però sappi ch'io fui Guido del Duca.
82  My blood was so with envy set on fire,
83  That if I had beheld a man make merry,
84  Thou wouldst have seen me sprinkled o'er with pallor.
82  Fu il sangue mio d'invidia sì rïarso,
83  che se veduto avesse uom farsi lieto,
84  visto m'avresti di livore sparso.
85  From my own sowing such the straw I reap!
86  O human race! why dost thou set thy heart
87  Where interdict of partnership must be?
85  Di mia semente cotal paglia mieto;
86  o gente umana, perché poni 'l core
87  là 'v' è mestier di consorte divieto?
88  This is Renier; this is the boast and honour
89  Of the house of Calboli, where no one since
90  Has made himself the heir of his desert.
88  Questi è Rinier; questi è 'l pregio e l'onore
89  de la casa da Calboli, ove nullo
90  fatto s'è reda poi del suo valore.
91  And not alone his blood is made devoid,
92  'Twixt Po and mount, and sea-shore and the Reno,
93  Of good required for truth and for diversion;
91  E non pur lo suo sangue è fatto brullo,
92  tra 'l Po e 'l monde e la marina e 'l Reno,
93  del ben richesto al vero e al trastullo;
94  For all within these boundaries is full
95  Of venomous roots, so that too tardily
96  By cultivation now would they diminish.
94  ché dentro a questi termini è ripieno
95  di venenosi sterpi, sì che tardi
96  per coltivare omai verrebber meno.
97  Where is good Lizio, and Arrigo Manardi,
98  Pier Traversaro, and Guido di Carpigna,
99  O Romagnuoli into bastards turned?
97  Ov' è 'l buon Lizio e Arrigo Mainardi?
98  Pier Traversaro e Guido di Carpigna?
99  Oh Romagnuoli tornati in bastardi!
100  When in Bologna will a Fabbro rise?
101  When in Faenza a Bernardin di Fosco,
102  The noble scion of ignoble seed?
100  Quando in Bologna un Fabbro si ralligna?
101 quando in Faenza un Bernardin di Fosco,
102  verga gentil di picciola gramigna?
103  Be not astonished, Tuscan, if I weep,
104  When I remember, with Guido da Prata,
105  Ugolin d' Azzo, who was living with us,
103  Non ti maravigliar s'io piango, Tosco,
104  quando rimembro, con Guido da Prata,
105  Ugolin d'Azzo che vivette nosco,
106  Frederick Tignoso and his company,
107  The house of Traversara, and th' Anastagi,
108  And one race and the other is extinct;
106  Federigo Tignoso e sua brigata,
107  la casa Traversara e li Anastagi
108  (e l'una gente e l'altra è diretata),
109  The dames and cavaliers, the toils and ease
110  That filled our souls with love and courtesy,
111  There where the hearts have so malicious grown!
109  le donne e ' cavalier, li affanni e li agi
110  che ne 'nvogliava amore e cortesia
112  là dove i cuor son fatti sì malvagi.
112  O Brettinoro! why dost thou not flee,
113  Seeing that all thy family is gone,
114  And many people, not to be corrupted?
112  O Bretinoro, ché non fuggi via,
113  poi che gita se n'è la tua famiglia
114  e molta gente per non esser ria?
115  Bagnacaval does well in not begetting
116  And ill does Castrocaro, and Conio worse,
117  In taking trouble to beget such Counts.
115  Ben fa Bagnacaval, che non rifiglia;
116  e mal fa Castrocaro, e peggio Conio,
117  che di figliar tai conti più s'impiglia.
118  Will do well the Pagani, when their Devil
119  Shall have departed; but not therefore pure
120  Will testimony of them e'er remain.
118  Ben faranno i Pagan, da che 'l demonio
119  lor sen girà; ma non però che puro
120  già mai rimagna d'essi testimonio.
121  O Ugolin de' Fantoli, secure
122  Thy name is, since no longer is awaited
123  One who, degenerating, can obscure it!
121  O Ugolin de' Fantolin, sicuro
122  è 'l nome tuo, da che più non s'aspetta
123  chi far lo possa, tralignando, scuro.
124  But go now, Tuscan, for it now delights me
125  To weep far better than it does to speak,
125  So much has our discourse my mind distressed."
124  Ma va via, Tosco, omai; ch'or mi diletta
125  troppo di pianger più che di parlare,
126  sì m'ha nostra ragion la mente stretta.”
127  We were aware that those beloved souls
128  Heard us depart; therefore, by keeping silent,
129  They made us of our pathway confident.
127  Noi sapavam che quell' anime care
128  ci sentivano andar; però, tacendo,
129  facëan noi del cammin confidare.
130  When we became alone by going onward,
131  Thunder, when it doth cleave the air, appeared
132  A voice, that counter to us came, exclaiming:
130  Poi fummo fatti soli procedendo,
131  folgore parve quando l'aere fende,
132  voce che giunse di contra dicendo:
133  "Shall slay me whosoever findeth me!"
134  And fled as the reverberation dies
135  If suddenly the cloud asunder bursts.
133  “Anciderammi qualunque m'apprende”;
134  e fuggì come tuon che si dilegua,
135  se sùbito la nuvola scoscende.
136  As soon as hearing had a truce from this,
137  Behold another, with so great a crash,
138  That it resembled thunderings following fast:
136  Come da lei l'udir nostro ebbe triegua,
137  ed ecco l'altra con sì gran fracasso,
138  che somigliò tonar che tosto segua:
139  "I am Aglaurus, who became a stone!"
140  And then, to press myself close to the Poet,
141  I backward, and not forward, took a step.
139  “Io sono Aglauro che divenni sasso”;
140  e allor, per ristrignermi al poeta,
141  in destro feci, e non innanzi, il passo.
142  Already on all sides the air was quiet;
143  And said he to me: "That was the hard curb
144  That ought to hold a man within his bounds;
142  Già era l'aura d'ogne parte queta;
143  ed el mi disse: “Quel fu 'l duro camo
144  che dovria l'uom tener dentro a sua meta.
145  But you take in the bait so that the hook
146  Of the old Adversary draws you to him,
147  And hence availeth little curb or call.
145  Ma voi prendete l'esca, sì che l'amo
146  de l'antico avversaro a sé vi tira;
147  e però poco val freno o richiamo.
148  The heavens are calling you, and wheel around you,
149  Displaying to you their eternal beauties,
150  And still your eye is looking on the ground;
148  Chiamavi 'l cielo e 'ntorno vi si gira,
149  mostrandovi le sue bellezze etterne,
150  e l'occhio vostro pur a terra mira;
151  Whence He, who all discerns, chastises you."

151  onde vi batte chi tutto discerne.”
Canto XV
This canto's opening with a double description of Time mirrors the diachronic nature of the entire Commedia — on Earth it may be as it is in Heaven, but in Purgatory their clocks clearly talk tick differently.  The language is convoluted in the Italian, and the translators, in trying to straighten it out for the benefit of their readers, make it harder to see how the text is turning us round and round as we try to grasp these discrepancies between Earth Time and Purgatory Time.   Here, that  difference is juggled playfully as a child might bat around a ball, albeit this is a ball of light — light being, as we shall see, the principle metaphor of this canto.   This passage is also an answer to Virgil's apostrophe concluding the previous canto that men should not look to mutable Earth but to the eternal wheel of the stars — i.e., the heavens, and so, that is exactly what Dante is doing here, with exactly the right zest of innocence, having no more pride or envy to encumber him.  The fact that some commentators consider these verses to be overly pedantic or their tone too playful or confusing misses their invocation of amazement.  Dante literally disorients us, preparing us for the appearance of an angel, which can only happen by our return to naiveté.  "Every poem," as Blake says, "must necessarily be a perfect unity," and any attentive reader who has come this far in the poem and who somehow concludes that Dante is a bungler says as much about Dante's subtilty as it does about these critics' lack of acuity.  Note to self: Make it your rule to follow the Master, for his critics will divert you down blind alleys.

I said light is the principle metaphor of this canto, but that observation must be refined.  As impure metals are refined by fire, our reaction to light is the terrible wonderful thing being played with here.  The whole canto is perforated with words that translate into seem or seeming, and this imparts to us the flickering nature of our physical apprehension of the phenomenon.  Our physical eyes can only catch hints of eternity, and we can only live inside a subjectivity whose main characteristic is a protean ephemerality.  How then are we to find our way?  That question is  our universally and unifying quest, and how we follow that uncertain flickering determines the strength of our inner light.  Doubt obscures it, faith clarifies it, and the whole purpose of doubt seems to be (there is that seems again) to be to sort the flash of Hellfire's trinketry, from the saving light of grace.  To quote Blake again: "If the Sun and Moon should ever doubt, they'd immediately go out."  In every moment of our lives, even in sleep, we are tasked to keep these lights lit.  The light of the physical sun in this canto is both guide and capricious Time master, it falls on the faces of the protagonists.  And here is where translations lead us astray.  This light hits us on the nose (per mezzo 'l naso), in that place that Hindu meditators call the bindu, or the third eye.  The commentators and the translators have tried to un-pretzel lines 7 - 9 to simply say what Dante does not simply say at all.  Yes, the protagonists are guided by sunlight, and are moving west, but so much more is happening here.  We have to remember that the entire Commedia is unfolding, is illuminated, if you will, in the retort of the imagination.  You might say that it is Dante's imagination, but you could as easily say that it is God's imagination, or each reader's own.  And this is where you, as a reader, begin to break down.  Reading this canto certainly has broken me down.  I have read it again and again, and can see each successive element, as one verse unfolds into the next, the words doing the work of words in presenting a kaleidoscope-like structure, wherein each turn of phrase floriates into a richer, more dazzling presentation.  One reads about the presence of the Angel.  One reads about the qualities of reflected light in a mirroring surface.  One hears Virgil's lesson on what it means to share, on what it means to accept a philosophical explanation, and on what it means to learn to wait, wait, wait for one's own spiritual development to be readied for the anima encounter of one's own supreme Beatrice.  One follows the light of the text, and reads about the three visions that stagger the aspirant, Dante: the vison of Saint Mary upon discovering the young Jesus in the Temple, and one asks: When Mary tells Jesus that she and his father have been searching for him for days, which father does she mean?  Joseph, or the one whose Word has made light?  One reads of Pisistratus turning aside the wrath of his wife, and of Saint Stephan sinking down into the darkness of a violent death, while fixing his eyes on the light above him, and like the Dante we are reading about, we are staggered.  (Note too, that the stoniness of the previous cantos are transmuted into these stones that bludgeon Stephan.)  One reads about the many masks of the self, that suddenly become more invisible than glass, all those baffling Funhouse mirrors of our manyMaya selves suddenly ceasing to be obscuring and distorting, and becoming, like those old lighthouse mirrors, which by the intricacies of their precise beveling are able to multiply the light of a single candle — in this case, the candle of the little human ego, the little human soul — by many orders of magnitude.  And one reads about the eternal fountain, which dowses all fires of envy or wrath with eternal peace — for this is the antidote to one's negative light, fired into existence through desire, and through those errors which are not false, that is to say the visions, mistakes, and faults which turn out to be our most reliable signposts on our way to transcendence.  And one reads about an approaching dark, a smoke that obscures all these reading lights — if we might call them that — and leaves one groping forward at the end of the canto, in too much darkness, just as one was groping at the beginning of the canto in too much light.  One reads, and reads, and reads, but as one reads, that word "about" keeps distancing us from what must become an unflinching immersion into this poem's vast, yet invisible organizing power.  Something is happening between the words, around and inside their sounds, that may literally drown us in inspiration, something both awesome and terrifying, an ultimate glorifying gladness that has pulled us in, but whether up or down, we do not know.  It seems that in the depths, there are no surfaces which say up or down.  Directionality means to move or to be still, to go toward or away from, and nothing else is of any consequence.  If we expect to keep company with Dante from here on up or in, we cannot keep our distance with an "about" manner of reading.  Like Jacob wrestling the angel, we have to grapple with what is happening, not just in the poem itself, but in our lives, and in our world, as we read the poem.  We must grapple and flail, just as a drowning man must grapple with water, fighting for air, fighting for light, yet not realizing that this ocean of mystery is the very element which sustains him.  There is no outside here, we have vision inside a vision, inside a vision, and these visions unfolding in the poem, unfolding in a timeless Dante, are likewise unfolding in ourselves.  If we as readers are not overwhelmed, overdazzled, and staggered by the light which ignites these visions, we remain stunted, both aesthetically and spiritually, since we have passed through Hell without learning, just as we are passing through purgatory without being purified.  If we read at the state of these distancing abouts, we will never reach the paradise of transcendence.  The 14th century world that Dante uses to elucidate the workings of the soul was no less sordid and violent, no less seething with undercurrents of wonder and salvation, than any of the various worlds that his readers have inhabited throughout history, and none of these worlds were any less baffling and babbling with evil than our own.  In truth, all of these worlds coalesce in the experience of the reader:  They are what is.  If we are not to drown in the light of our own inspiration, we have to do as Dante has done.  We have to surrender to the full scope, however complex, however excoriating, however fantastical and miraculous, of this Isness which always is.  

1  As much as 'twixt the close of the third hour
2  And dawn of day appeareth of that sphere
3  Which aye in fashion of a child is playing,

1  Quanto tra l'ultimar de l'ora terza
2  e 'l principio del dì par de la spera
3  che sempre a guisa di fanciullo scherza,

4  So much it now appeared, towards the night,
5  Was of his course remaining to the sun;
6  There it was evening, and 'twas midnight here;

4  tanto pareva già inver' la sera
5  essere al sol del suo corso rimaso;
6  vespero là, e qui mezza notte era.

7  And the rays smote the middle of our faces,
8  Because by us the mount was so encircled,
9  That straight towards the west we now were going

7  E i raggi ne ferien per mezzo 'l naso,
8  perché per noi girato era sì 'l monte,
9  che già dritti andavamo inver' l'occaso,

10  When I perceived my forehead overpowered
11  Beneath the splendour far more than at first,
12  And stupor were to me the things unknown,

10  quand' io senti' a me gravar la fronte
11  a lo splendore assai più che di prima,
12  e stupor m'eran le cose non conte;

13  Whereat towards the summit of my brow
14  I raised my hands, and made myself the visor
15  Which the excessive glare diminishes.

13  ond' io levai le mani inver' la cima
14  de le mie ciglia, e fecimi 'l solecchio,
15  che del soverchio visibile lima.

16  As when from off the water, or a mirror,
17  The sunbeam leaps unto the opposite side,
18  Ascending upward in the selfsame measure

16  Come quando da l'acqua o da lo specchio
17  salta lo raggio a l'opposita parte,
18  salendo su per lo modo parecchio

19  That it descends, and deviates as far
20  From falling of a stone in line direct,
21  (As demonstrate experiment and art,)

19  a quel che scende, e tanto si diparte
20  dal cader de la pietra in igual tratta,
21  sì come mostra esperïenza e arte;

22  So it appeared to me that by a light
23  Refracted there before me I was smitten;
24  On which account my sight was swift to flee.

22  così mi parve da luce rifratta
23  quivi dinanzi a me esser percosso;
24  per che a fuggir la mia vista fu ratta.

25  "What is that, Father sweet, from which I cannot
26  So fully screen my sight that it avail me,"
27  Said I, "and seems towards us to be moving?"

25  “Che è quel, dolce padre, a che non posso
26  schermar lo viso tanto che mi vaglia,”
27  diss' io, “e pare inver' noi esser mosso?”

28  "Marvel thou not, if dazzle thee as yet
29  The family of heaven," he answered me;
30  "An angel 'tis, who comes to invite us upward.

28  “Non ti maravigliar s'ancor t'abbaglia
29  la famiglia del cielo,” a me rispuose:
30  “messo è che viene ad invitar ch'om saglia.

31  Soon will it be, that to behold these things
32  Shall not be grievous, but delightful to thee
33  As much as nature fashioned thee to feel."

31  Tosto sarà ch'a veder queste cose
32  non ti fia grave, ma fieti diletto
33  quanto natura a sentir ti dispuose.”

34  When we had reached the Angel benedight,
35  With joyful voice he said: "Here enter in
36  To stairway far less steep than are the others."

34  Poi giunti fummo a l'angel benedetto,
35  con lieta voce disse: “Intrate quinci
36  ad un scaleo vie men che li altri eretto.”

37  We mounting were, already thence departed,
38  And "Beati misericordes" was
39  Behind us sung, "Rejoice, thou that o'ercomest!"

37  Noi montavam, già partiti di linci,
38  e “Beati misericordes!” fue
39  cantato retro, e “Godi tu che vinci!”

40  My Master and myself, we two alone
41  Were going upward, and I thought, in going,
42  Some profit to acquire from words of his;

40  Lo mio maestro e io soli amendue
41  suso andavamo; e io pensai, andando,
42  prode acquistar ne le parole sue;

43  And I to him directed me, thus asking:
44  "What did the spirit of Romagna mean,
45  Mentioning interdict and partnership?"

43  e dirizza'mi a lui sì dimandando:
44  “Che volse dir lo spirto di Romagna,
45  e 'divieto' e 'consorte' menzionando?”

46  Whence he to me: "Of his own greatest failing
47  He knows the harm; and therefore wonder not
48  If he reprove us, that we less may rue it.

46  Per ch'elli a me: “Di sua maggior magagna
47  conosce il danno; e però non s'ammiri
48  se ne riprende perché men si piagna.

49  Because are thither pointed your desires
50  Where by companionship each share is lessened,
51  Envy doth ply the bellows to your sighs.

49  Perché s'appuntano i vostri disiri
50  dove per compagnia parte si scema,
51  invidia move il mantaco a' sospiri.

52  But if the love of the supernal sphere
53  Should upwardly direct your aspiration,
54  There would not be that fear within your breast;

52  Ma se l'amor de la spera supprema
53  torcesse in suso il disiderio vostro,
54  non vi sarebbe al petto quella tema;

55  For there, as much the more as one says 'Our,'
56  So much the more of good each one possesses,
57  And more of charity in that cloister burns."

55  ché, per quanti si dice più lì 'nostro,'
56  tanto possiede più di ben ciascuno,
57  e più di caritate arde in quel chiostro.”

58  "I am more hungering to be satisfied,"
59    I said, "than if I had before been silent,
60   And more of doubt within my mind I gather.

58  “Io son d'esser contento più digiuno,”
59  diss' io, “che se mi fosse pria taciuto,
60  e più di dubbio ne la mente aduno.

61  How can it be, that boon distributed
62  The more possessors can more wealthy make
63  Therein, than if by few it be possessed?"

61  Com' esser puote ch'un ben, distributo
62  in più posseditor, faccia più ricchi
63  di sé che se da pochi è posseduto?”

64  And he to me: "Because thou fixest still
65  Thy mind entirely upon earthly things,
66  Thou pluckest darkness from the very light.

64  Ed elli a me: “Però che tu rificchi
65  la mente pur a le cose terrene,
66  di vera luce tenebre dispicchi.

67  That goodness infinite and ineffable
68   Which is above there, runneth unto love,
69   As to a lucid body comes the sunbeam.

67  Quello infinito e ineffabil bene
68  che là sù è, così corre ad amore
69  com' a lucido corpo raggio vene.

70  So much it gives itself as it finds ardour,
71  So that as far as charity extends,
72  O'er it increases the eternal valour.

70  Tanto si dà quanto trova d'ardore;
71  sì che, quantunque carità si stende,
72  cresce sovr' essa l'etterno valore.

73  And the more people thitherward aspire,
74  More are there to love well, and more they love there,
75  And, as a mirror, one reflects the other.

73  E quanta gente più là sù s'intende,
74  più v'è da bene amare, e più vi s'ama,
75  e come specchio l'uno a l'altro rende.

76  And if my reasoning appease thee not,
77  Thou shalt see Beatrice; and she will fully
78  Take from thee this and every other longing.

76  E se la mia ragion non ti disfama,
77  vedrai Beatrice, ed ella pienamente
78  ti torrà questa e ciascun' altra brama.

79  Endeavour, then, that soon may be extinct,
80  As are the two already, the five wounds
81  That close themselves again by being painful."

79  Procaccia pur che tosto sieno spente,
80  come son già le due, le cinque piaghe,
81  che si richiudon per esser dolente.”

82  Even as I wished to say, "Thou dost appease me,"
83  I saw that I had reached another circle,
84  So that my eager eyes made me keep silence.

82  Com' io voleva dicer “Tu m'appaghe,”
83  vidimi giunto in su l'altro girone,
84  sì che tacer mi fer le luci vaghe.

85  There it appeared to me that in a vision
86  Ecstatic on a sudden I was rapt,
87  And in a temple many persons saw;

85  Ivi mi parve in una visïone
86  estatica di sùbito esser tratto,
87  e vedere in un tempio più persone;

88  And at the door a woman, with the sweet
89  Behaviour of a mother, saying: "Son,
90  Why in this manner hast thou dealt with us?

88  e una donna, in su l'entrar, con atto
89  dolce di madre dicer: “Figliuol mio,
90  perché hai tu così verso noi fatto?

91  Lo, sorrowing, thy father and myself
92  Were seeking for thee;"—and as here she ceased,
93  That which appeared at first had disappeared.

91  Ecco, dolenti, lo tuo padre e io
92  ti cercavamo.” E come qui si tacque,
93  ciò che pareva prima, dispario.

94  Then I beheld another with those waters
95  Adown her cheeks which grief distils whenever
96  From great disdain of others it is born,

94  Indi m'apparve un'altra con quell' acque
95  giù per le gote che 'l dolor distilla
96  quando di gran dispetto in altrui nacque,

97  And saying: "If of that city thou art lord,
98  For whose name was such strife among the gods,
99  And whence doth every science scintillate,

97  e dir: “Se tu se' sire de la villa
98  del cui nome ne' dèi fu tanta lite,
99  e onde ogne scïenza disfavilla,

100  Avenge thyself on those audacious arms
101  That clasped our daughter, O Pisistratus;"
102  And the lord seemed to me benign and mild

100  vendica te di quelle braccia ardite
101  ch'abbracciar nostra figlia, o Pisistràto.”
102 E 'l segnor mi parea, benigno e mite,

103  To answer her with aspect temperate:
104  "What shall we do to those who wish us ill,
105  If he who loves us be by us condemned?"

103  risponder lei con viso temperato:
104  “Che farem noi a chi mal ne disira,
105  se quei che ci ama è per noi condannato?”

106  Then saw I people hot in fire of wrath,
107  With stones a young man slaying, clamorously
108  Still crying to each other, "Kill him! kill him!"

106  Poi vidi genti accese in foco d'ira
107  con pietre un giovinetto ancider, forte
108  gridando a sé pur: “Martira, martira!”

109  And him I saw bow down, because of death
110  That weighed already on him, to the earth,
111  But of his eyes made ever gates to heaven,

109  E lui vedea chinarsi, per la morte
110  che l'aggravava già, inver' la terra,
111  ma de li occhi facea sempre al ciel porte,

112  Imploring the high Lord, in so great strife,
113  That he would pardon those his persecutors,
114  With such an aspect as unlocks compassion.

112  orando a l'alto Sire, in tanta guerra,
113  che perdonasse a' suoi persecutori,
114  con quello aspetto che pietà diserra.

115  Soon as my soul had outwardly returned
116  To things external to it which are true,
117  Did I my not false errors recognize.

115  Quando l'anima mia tornò di fori
116  a le cose che son fuor di lei vere,
117  io riconobbi i miei non falsi errori.

118  My Leader, who could see me bear myself
119  Like to a man that rouses him from sleep,
120  Exclaimed: "What ails thee, that thou canst not stand?

118  Lo duca mio, che mi potea vedere
119  far sì com' om che dal sonno si slega,
120  disse: “Che hai che non ti puoi tenere,

121  But hast been coming more than half a league
122  Veiling thine eyes, and with thy legs entangled,
123  In guise of one whom wine or sleep subdues?"

121  ma se' venuto più che mezza lega
122  velando li occhi e con le gambe avvolte,
123  a guisa di cui vino o sonno piega?”

124  "O my sweet Father, if thou listen to me,
125  I'll tell thee," said I, "what appeared to me,
126  When thus from me my legs were ta'en away."

124  “O dolce padre mio, se tu m'ascolte,
125  io ti dirò,” diss' io, “ciò che m'apparve
126  quando le gambe mi furon sì tolte.”

127  And he: "If thou shouldst have a hundred masks
128  Upon thy face, from me would not be shut
129  Thy cogitations, howsoever small.

127  Ed ei: “Se tu avessi cento larve
128  sovra la faccia, non mi sarian chiuse
129  le tue cogitazion, quantunque parve.

130  What thou hast seen was that thou mayst not fail
131  To ope thy heart unto the waters of peace,
132  Which from the eternal fountain are diffused.

130  Ciò che vedesti fu perché non scuse
131  d'aprir lo core a l'acque de la pace
132  che da l'etterno fonte son diffuse.

133  I did not ask, 'What ails thee?' as he does
134  Who only looketh with the eyes that see not
135  When of the soul bereft the body lies,

133  Non dimandai 'Che hai?' per quel che face
134  chi guarda pur con l'occhio che non vede,
135  quando disanimato il corpo giace;

136  But asked it to give vigour to thy feet;
137  Thus must we needs urge on the sluggards, slow
138  To use their wakefulness when it returns."

136  ma dimandai per darti forza al piede:
137  così frugar conviensi i pigri, lenti
138  ad usar lor vigilia quando riede.”

139  We passed along, athwart the twilight peering
140  Forward as far as ever eye could stretch
141  Against the sunbeams serotine and lucent;

139  Noi andavam per lo vespero, attenti
140  oltre quanto potean li occhi allungarsi
141  contra i raggi serotini e lucenti.

142  And lo! by slow degrees a smoke approached
143  In our direction, sombre as the night,
144  Nor was there place to hide one's self therefrom.

142  Ed ecco a poco a poco un fummo farsi
143  verso di noi come la notte oscuro;
144  né da quello era loco da cansarsi.

145  This of our eyes and the pure air bereft us.

145  Questo ne tolse li occhi e l'aere puro.

Canto XVI
Again, in this canto, the sky, our guidance, cannot be seen.  This is the darkest point of the entire Commedia.  Here, in this sixteenth canto of the Purgatorio, where Dante, the aspirant, has already been purged of Pride and Envy, why this darkness?  The reason is both structural and moral.  We have reached the center, the 50th canto in toto.  The fact that the poet makes the darkest part of the Commedia at its center reminds us of Black Holes, or of the pre-conditions before the Big Bang, or of the brooding of God before He spoke the creative Word, or of that experience of the meditator before the 3rd eye opens and light inundates the body and unites it with its source.  Perhaps the accumulative experience that we have had up to now in our reading has, through a conglomerated mass of judgements, by whatever incensed feeling we may have had at all the atrocities that we have witnessed heretofore, densified as an acrid smoke: Wrath.  Here we find that no matter if we are rightfully righteous in our condemnations of human depravity, with which the Commedia has been rife, we are still blind, if our discernment remains clouded by wrath's fires.  In Canto XV, the Envious are blind, because their eyes are sutured shut, but here the eyes are closed for a different reason, the entire atmosphere is poisoned, and even Dante must protect himself by squeezing his eyes closed.  Note how this canto's opening mirrors that of the previous one, where Dante was blinded, not by darkness and smoke, but by a light too bright to endure.  In an image rhyme of the Envious, who, as in the Biblical parable, the blind lead the blind, and must lay their hands on one another’s shoulders, making a long chain of the handicapped, here, Dante must do the same, but with Virgil as his support.  Some ink has been spilled by commentators on why Virgil is able to see here, and some have equated this capability to what Thomas Aquinas called the light of "rational discernment."  Certainly, Virgil, being a shade, has never been possessed with physical eyes.  If we have not realized it by now, Virgil has always been a protean kind of being, whose capabilities and shortcomings, expediently answer to Dante's imaginative requirements in the moment, just as our interpretations of Dante's meanings answer in a like manner for us readers.  But Virgil, here, need not be able to see at all, and his guidance might be entirely accounted for by his knowledge of the shape of the mountain, the direction in which they are moving, and his past experience that he and his ward are protected in their foreordained journey by divine grace.  He need only trust his rational discernment to proceed.  Also, Virgil's guidance may be conceived of as the fixed condition of his paganism.  Virgil is a denizen of Hell, but because of his virtue, his only punishment is that he cannot attain Christian Salvation.  Therefore, none of the punishments in Purgatory can touch him.  There is no reason for him to be punished, since purgation for such a pagan would be moot.  If Virgil possesses these qualifications, his rational discernment, his fate to be unredeemable by enticements or punishment, his ability to adapt his capabilities according to his charge's needs, than line 15 here becomes a motto for any aspirant on such a pilgrimage: “Guarda che da me tu non sia mozzo.” ( Look that you're not cut off from me.)  I think this also addresses readers, who should not get cut off from their own rational discernment as they pursue this or any other text.  Any faith, that abandons the light of reason and reason's fact, is nothing more than a dangerous superstition, the delusion of light in a cloud of bitter darkness.  Virgil's position here as guide is also alerting us to something else, which is happening as the aspirant ascends the mountain of Purgatory.  If Hell was a kind of compendium of screaming yellow journalism, history heated by self-interest and a partisanship so virulent that it has devolved to justify a single corrupted ego, here, in Purgatory, the cooler passions of philosophy prevail.  We are indeed dealing with the same issues and with even some of the same kinds of punishments as those of Hell, but from a more disinterested (in the Keatsean sense) position.  The text has become less of a diatribe of competing self-interests, and more of a disputation among fellow truth-seekers.  The We-position is harmonizing with that of the postion of the I.  If, in the previous canto, we get variations of the words seems, or seeming, or appearing, i.e., the vocabulary of illusion, in this canto words like cagione — cause — or words and phrases denoting reason, predominate.  We are moving into realms of consideration and of contemplation, and by so doing, we are beginning to understand the Whys and Wherefores of how things are and who we are.  We are beginning to probe with reason, a light which emanates from devotion, and from our darkness, we are beginning to ferret out how a prayer such as the Agnus Dei has the power to placate anger.   

If no stars, if no planets, if nothing to be seen above in the blighted heavens can serve as compass, yet there are sounds here, songs of unseen and unseeing spirits infusing the sordid air with a Gregorian chanting of the Agnus Dei — lamb of God, the meek surrendering to the vates' knife, the innocent, infant version of the old scapegoat, whose blood here is a kind of multi-directional music which immerses and cleanses the confused soul of wrath.  We've seen enough wrath throughout the Commedia, and here Dante tells us what he believes is ire's antidote.  I think this is a very bitter pill to gulp, that the innocent must meekly surrender to the predations of the guilty — but perhaps if one realizes that each of us harbors everyone, then the guilty, even in their most vicious incarnations, are parts of us that can only be placated by this baptism in their victim's blood.  Is this the baptism that is happening here as these disembodied voices sing: Lamb of God, Thou takest away the sins of the world, thou takest away the sins of the world, Grant us peace."  This prayer is a kind of blind realization that our own worst natures, our cynicism, our violence, our constant selfish desire to destroy all those things and all those people whose presence spoils our illusions of how we think the world should conform to our beliefs about it, and confronts us simply with the medicine of compassion, forgiveness, innocence, the sacrifice of the best that we are to alleviate the torments of the worst that we are.  If wrath rends us into warring ganglions unconnected and cancerous to one another, it is this acceptance, this willingness to close the wound with the sacrifice of our own body-beliefs, that returns us to initial conditions, that gives us the chance to start again in Eden and to progress from the garden of paradise to the paradisal city of Jerusalem, to evolve from children of Nature, to parents of humans, to a city of transcendent angels.  This prayer is the pillar of sound which this harmonious chant raises before our benighted spirit, although here, in the condition of still unpurged wrath, that pillar seems yet but bits of hope dispersed in a dark, bitter mist.

The opening of the mutually laudatory dialog between Marco and Dante is quite different from those slashing exchanges between the Dante and the shades in Hell.  In the manner we have become accustomed to, the shade Marco, asks, in amazement, who this might be whose breath and movements are substantial enough to cleave the heavy atmosphere, and then adds, as a way of distinguishing a living soul from postmortem ones, who this might be who counts time, not in steps of repentance as the souls here in Purgatory must, but by means of an earthly calendar.   Dante praises Marco as one blessed to be purifying himself to return, cleansed of sin, to his Creator, and further he promises that Marco will hear of wonders, should he reverse his direction and follow.  The wonder is Dante's self, as much as his story, and in the most extensive declaration to this point in the Commedia, Dante tells of his grace with a metaphor which continues an earlier statement by Virgil.  The metaphor is of winding and unwinding, be it a knot, as Virgil has said, be it the sins of the mortal flesh unwound with the death shroud, or be it the swaddling clothes of an infant.  This being yet another instance of Dante's virtuosity in creating a resonating infrastructure throughout the work, which continually weaves many different images and sounds for the reader, some now rising above the surface, to appear in consciousness, while others sink below, to resonate from unconscious depths.  We might also notice in this canto how this image of a babe in swaddling clothes, about a third of the way into the canto is contrasted with the three old men, who symmetrically appear about a third of the way from the end.  And to go further, recollecting the beginning of the previous canto, where time itself is presented as prayer stations, simultaneously occurring at the 3rd hour and the 9th.  There is a proportionality here which is observed thematically, spatially, and temporally.   This whole poem has about it the characteristics of a living system, which some ecologists have summarized as:

Networks — interlocking sounds and themes
Nested Systems — Lines, verses, cantos, canticles
Cycles — repeating themes at different levels of awareness, for example each canto of a certain number taking up the theme in another canto in a different canticle
Flows (flow through of shared resources) — narrations, metaphors, meanings
Development — increasing sophistication of understandings progressing from earlier to later expositions 
Dynamic Equilibrium — the entire Commedia handling all these movements without breaking the bounds of its form, and without become static

If one wants to know why this work has continued to resonate with successive generations for century after century, you might consider how the Commedia so emulates how life itself develops and maintains its vitality in spite of the many vicissitudes which it faces.  If, quoting Dumas, we say: "After God, Shakespeare has created most," we might say, "After God, Dante has created best."

I think we can safely assume here that the philosophy which Marco imparts to Dante, the aspirant and protagonist of the poem, is the philosophy of Dante, the author of the poem.  That Marco is Dante's mouthpiece, while true enough, should not lull readers into believing that Marco is a totally reliable informant.  After all, Marco is in Purgatory, and is still blinded by the sin of wrath.  His whole exposition is colored by a kind resigned exasperation, and he is easily coaxed by Dante's invitation to reveal to him (Dante) the cause of the world's evil.  The aspirant's question is a loaded one.  Dante believes the world is evil — that is, Dante's prejudice, his own wrath, as he has shown time and time again when traversing Hell.  It is this prejudice which he assumes that Marco — who is still working through the consequences of his own wrath — shares.  The philosophical position discussed throughout this canto begins with this conclusion, and then works back through those premises which are this conclusion's cause.  It's a reverse logic, which may well be traced to the Christian belief in Original Sin, and as the talk of these two proceeds, if readers likewise have assumed this conclusion, what remains for readers and protagonists alike is to find some way to justify that evil, exonerate fate, the mechanics of the heavens, or God, and transform their anguished rage against these injustices, to arrive at the condition of peace.  No small task for any of us.  And the aspirant Dante puts it very well, by exclaiming in lines 53 and 54: ma io scoppio/ dentro ad un dubbio (I am bursting inside with doubt).  This may be philosophy, and not more of the screeching and howling of Hell, it's cooler, yes, but it's still boiling within the soul, and begging for a tempering resolution.  We have to take what is presented here seriously, if we are ever to find peace for ourselves and be the messengers of peace.
Imagine that the city/state, the polis, the place, the culture, the language that you were born into was deeply felt as an extension of that which gave you your sense of you as you.  Imagine  that you fought wars for this deep, broad sense of Youness, that you served this You at the highest levels of government, and that when on a mission for that Polis, you were betrayed, exiled in abstentia, your family name and inheritance, your wife and children likewise betrayed, and torn away, and without trial or any semblance of justice.  Imagine that on pain of death, you could not set foot again in this entire domain of your larger, extended self, save in that last remnant, which nothing could deprive you of — your language.  Independence would no longer be your lot.  You could never say again, for the rest of your life: This is my home.  Henceforth, the food you eat, the bed you sleep in, the roof over your head protecting you from night and from human and animal predators can come only through the uncertainty of another's charity.  Anger, a sense of vengeance, a sense of guilt and shame, a mental anguish that goes round and round in your head, that gnaws at your heart, that occludes every clarity of thought, intruding without cessation whenever you lie down to sleep, whenever you have a moment alone, whenever you meet another person, wondering, fearing, who is this, will they extend their hand in friendship, yet harbor for me a literal dagger? — this is Dante, and in some form or other, this is also your own guilt, shame, envy, anger, doubt, fret ... in a word, your world, your You.  To be free of this internal conflict, which you helplessly see writ large everywhere in the world that you know, to have just a moment of peace, to make sense of things so irrational and cruel, so colossally unjust, so contrary to the religion, which everyone proclaims, but which no one practices, you are thrown back on your own devices, and you incessantly ask yourself: How am I to be free, but not cynical, decent, but not a dupe of evil people and evil causes?  How can I become what I've been taught since the earliest days of my childhood: A good, humane, spiritually upright person?  This is the aspirant, Dante's, situation, the source of his passion, the goad that constantly harasses him, and as a reader, you come to the horrible, yet sublime realization, that this also is your situation, and that your own expanded sense of Youness, your sense of self in a world that is so often punishing and unjust, a world that not only betrays you through your excesses, but also through your natural appetites, and through the very best of your virtues.  All this hypocritical, insane, dangerous, ever-present, every-impinging self, in all its riotous confusion, its cruelty, and even its beauty, confronts you as You, and it begs in every moment for you to make sense of it, for you to convert its chaos into a humane and compassionate order, for you somehow to be redeemed.  It is from this roiling background that the poetry of the Commedia emerges, coming, with that last vestige of yourself — your language — as that single, slender hope you have to extricate yourself from the poisonous thicket of your circumstances, and to find something to love, something that merits love and propagates it — if not in the world at large — your extended You — then in the replication of this world which has excavated the internal geopolitical geography, which you call your soul.
You recognize that what you are has two quite distinct yet quite inseparable qualities, two suns, as the text of this canto has it, and that these two suns might double the glory of who you are in a mutually supportive opposition, as in the opposition of the thumb and fingers of the hand, or that each might, in a disastrous error of self-aggrandizement, vie to dominate and even destroy the other.  You can seeing nothing without the light of these two suns, and yet if one attempts to eclipse the other, then its light, the brighter it becomes, creates an ever-deepening shadow, an ever more destructive and self-destructing blindness.  You see all this quite clearly in moments of balance, which are also moments of revelation, moments of vision, moments wherein supreme elements of dissonance are brought into sublime harmony, and in those moments, you no longer identify yourself with one or the other of these suns, but rather with the light that each lends the other, with the barycenter which unites them, and which creates a You, not out of comprise, or the victory or defeat of one sun by the other, but rather out of a  brilliant interpenetration of illuminations from opposites ends of a transcendent spectrum.  This barycenter is love.
The dialogue that we read here, that we hear here, because as we know these characters are united solely by sound, is an attempt to quell the wrath that one sun has for the other, and to re-establish them in their proper relationship as a simultaneity and as a totalizing entity.  The enterprise of this canto is one of naming these two suns, and attributing to each their proper role anent the operations of the other.   Should we call them Politics and Religion, intellect and inspiration, Ghibellines and Guelphs, Liberals and Conservatives, Papacy and Emperor, spiritual and material, practical and aesthetic, factual and mystical, temporal and immortal, particular and universal, ego and soul ... ?  although each is protean, each maintains in its own sphere immutable attributes, and neither can ever completely usurp the domain of the other without bringing calamity to both.  Each of the deadly sins, which the mount of Purgatory is designed to erase, is a misperception, which obliterates the possibility of transcendent wholeness, and each has its own peculiar modality for producing the lopsidedness which is despair and pain.
We reach a point in reading Dante, or any great author, wherein we move from confronting the text as the problem of interpreting the author's intention, to a condition wherein the amorphous blob of our thought is pricked here and there and the inchoate, temporarily at least, whirls into a moment of clarity.  Thoughts and feelings arise as a result of an immersive reading.  Questions, and aphorisms arise that may have no direct connection to the text, but which the text has provided a prompt for a new way of thinking and feeling, almost as if, to use the metaphor of the two suns presented in this canto, some hitherto un-examinable thing was arising between the author's text and the reader's response, which neither the text nor the interpretation of the text could have begotten.  This is what I have called the barycenter, a thing inexplicable in itself, but which nevertheless spins into being whole galaxies of insights.  Below are some of those aphorisms and questions which arose when my reading of this canto began to revolve in this shared gravitational field.

This is a different style of reading than is commonly practiced.  It is defined by what it is not.  It is not academic reading, that uses knowledge to distance.  It is not reading for diversion or entertainment.  It is not reading to establish a bond between other readers of the same material or to show off one's learning in conversation.  It is not reading to ornament the mind, or garner admiration.  It is not scriptural reading for moral proscriptions.  It is not philosophical reading.  It is not aesthetic reading.  It is not fantasy reading.  It does not traffic in paradox nor aspire to totalization.  It does not summarize nor does it parse.  It is reading that includes what it excludes and is what it is not.

A miscellany of contemplations derived from a reading of this canto:

The inside of a poem — like the words of this canto, and of the entire Commedia — is a place of sound alone.  The light of vision must be created by sound, as it is in Genesis when "God said, "Let there be Light ... "  

Due soli — twin suns: Each person must bear within themselves that which provides health and well-being to the mortal power.  The conscious ego in charge of the temporal body, while that which provides guidance on "how" to perform the ego function: the transcendental soul.

The swaddling clothes that death unwinds — the philosophy of this and the previous canto begins to supplant history as concerns of the spirit begin to supplant concerns of the flesh.

Exemplars of contemporary evil:
* Evangelical pastors who fleece, poison, and mislead their flocks.
* Political officials and judges who violate the law and their oath to serve for private profit or power
Their chief control mechanisms: lying, propaganda, fear-mongering, gaslighting, scapegoating, projecting their own crimes on others.
The role of the guide (pastor, ruler, leader, parent) is to instruct their charges to be able to discern the difference between bodily and spiritual nourishment and poison
The will — the conscious mind — remains free to choose because it can harbor various perceptions of good.  The source of your freedom is also the source of many of our double-binds.  The conscious mind can generate images — Blakean "imagination" — not just reflexively respond to sensory input.

What is the liberated soul's proper response to evil?  righteous indignation?  anger?  sadness?  philosophical calm?  laughter at its absurdity?  If fate is an emergent property of reflective action — one still must respond to this fate — and hopefully help turn the automaticity of circumstance towards public virtue, ecological harmony, and inner peace.

This whole discussion of necessity and free will (lines 65 - 69) in the I Ching is a sort of predilection of the Times to render certain behaviors auspicious, others, inauspicious.  The choice to preserve the auspicious is the will of the "Superior Man," while the "inferior man" follows the inauspicious course, thereby defying the predilection of the Times.

Conditions of Mind
Worry ¬¬–  fret
Conniving — scheming
Planning — preparing
Contemplation — meditation (not involving intellect)
Inspiration — imagination
Expression — action

Play and devotion as opposed to necessity or duty.  Not "I must," but "I am free to ... "

Is newborn's innocence a che sa nulla (line 88) or a tabula rasa (blank slate) of mind?  Only in the sense that Thomas Aquinas seems to mean when he says that in order for learning (development, progress for mortality to transcendence) to take place, the mind must be cleared of all prejudice and stilled.  This is the very things that conservative thinkers and those transfixed by tradition refuse to or cannot do.  Which is why the conservative position in any field inevitably morphs into a moribund evil.  To learn, one must return to initial conditions of quietude and nothingness, remaining passive as a form of passionate expectation, which is why Aquinas calls the intellect "a passive power."  When this passive power of initial conditions is attained the organizing power of the Cosmos is free to act in accordance with its own unfolding wholeness (see ecological principles above).

The activity of the Cosmos is innocent — even as the activity of plants or animals is innocent.  They never cease to play their part — be it predator or prey, eater or eaten, in harmonizing the whole.  With the gift of choice, free will, humans as they mature from innocent childhood have the quality to corrupt this faculty of intellect.  A childish, animal, or plant-like delight in the trinkets of incarnation may be increasingly corrupted in the human as the maturing person keeps trying to augment this delight of the sensory appetite by accruing a substitutive quantity of privilege and power.  True maturity as Peace Pilgrim expostulated it is the transference of this childish delight to those things discussed in the previous canto as those which are augmented and nut diminished by sharing.

Mortal life is a pilgrimage from infancy and the infant's pursuit of and need to obtain the fulfillment of basic desires to an ideal of transcendence, i.e., a freedom from mortal desires.  Marcos, in this canto refers to mortals as dense, not very bright, as the bitter smoke of this terrace of Purgatory illustrates.  Even a desire for a cookie can be a barrier to that pilgrims spiritual progress if that desire is not purified by a gratitude for its gift — the desire to read turns base and is an obstruction if it is motivated by a desire to excel over others, to be a "know it all," versus the desire to instruct, i.e., transform the body on its pilgrimage to liberate its soul.

The soul — a term we use as a place marker for a process.  What is that process?  It must be the recognition that the joys of selfless love shine through even the black smoke of wrath in the presence of injustice and death.

Free will cannot be subject by necessity or any other mechanism such as celestial determinism, or a compulsion of the senses and their appetitive nature.  Why?  Because free will is incorporeal.  It is formed by choice, not by habit, social, of innate conditioning.  Free will is that in meditation which meditates, in contemplating which contemplates, and that in the creative person which creates.  It's highest merit is that it follows a freedom which leads to calm exhilaration for all whom it touches.  Free of the fetters of conditioning's praise or blame, its virtues follow the ideal of health and blessings for all.

Freedom is choice.  And choice is the metaposition of the conscious mind, which by its imaginative powers is able to conjure up a possible future by examining various possible scenarios and assessing the probable consequences for the manifestation of each.  This power can reflect and project and is not just reflexively a slave to present circumstance.  Reason, in Dante, enables one to use chance occurrences as the seeds of liberation.  Responsibility is the "yoke of liberty."

Free will can only arise from an ideal, and adapting to circumstances.  The "practical" person is only a parody of freedom, only a clever slave to circumstance.  The realist position has no room for morality.  Expediency is its only prompt to action. 

The same Intellect is a regulating mechanism that can maintain the organism in a state of healthy equilibrium, just as other mechanisms of the physical body maintain a steady internal temperature not matter what the vicissitudes of the weather.

In the medieval mind the state/polis/empire is personified, and its temporal body is not a congregation, which we might call its people, they would call its king.  This is state as ego, whose job is to preserve the health and well-being of its components, i.e., its lands, its people, its borders, the smooth operations of its laws and its commerce.  The ego's authority is inborn, unalienable as the king's title is inherited, the is to say, an attribute of his blood.  He is the past circulating as the present and serving as the progenitor of the future.  As such he is perpetual.  His two suns are valor and courtesy.  Valor and courtesy revolve around the barycenter of gentillesse, genteelness, and is due respect.  This ego/king is possessed of glamor, a magically quality which shines through time as fame, and is bruited on the lips of the people as renown, which are not to be confused with our modern sense of celebrity.  An ideal earthly leader is an exemplar of particular virtue — magnanimity, courage, piety, compassion, faithfulness, responsibility, dignity, and his capitol is the true city, fed and surrounded by its Garden of Eden, Blake's Jerusalem, arising from Beulah, his beautiful land.  The goal of the polis, or secular city/state is to curb the animal passions and provide universal justice.  Its function are insuring domestic tranquility and prosperity, since economic systems based upon animal desire are bound to produce inequalities as those who are most rapacious acquire the most wealth and power and create a greedocracy, the grandiosity and vulgarity of a mogul’s casinos and golf estates, garishness usurping the rightful place of splendor.

The figures of history possessing fame, the number of these figures on earth at any one time is magical, i.e., 40 or as in Borges' "Lamed Wufnics" from The Book of Imaginary Beings, 36.  These are the righteous for whose sake God does not destroy this wicked world.  In this canto they are telescoped down to 3 (another magical number) old Guelphs, which balance out previous appearances of righteous Ghibellines, as the poem attempts to a reconciliation of the warring political positions based upon shared virtues.  And the two positions, the due soli, are reconciled in this way: The collective looks to the State for nourishment, the individual conscience to the guidance of the Church.

The proper responses to corruption in either State of Church are
denunciation
renunciation
rehabilitation
return to the ideal of forgiveness, peace, prosperity 

1  Darkness of hell, and of a night deprived
2  Of every planet under a poor sky,
3  As much as may be tenebrous with cloud,
1  Buio d'inferno e di notte privata
2  d'ogne pianeto, sotto pover cielo,
3  quant' esser può di nuvol tenebrata,
4  Ne'er made unto my sight so thick a veil,
5  As did that smoke which there enveloped us,
6  Nor to the feeling of so rough a texture;
4  non fece al viso mio sì grosso velo
5  come quel fummo ch'ivi ci coperse,
6  né a sentir di così aspro pelo,
7 For not an eye it suffered to stay open;
8  Whereat mine escort, faithful and sagacious,
9  Drew near to me and offered me his shoulder.
7  che l'occhio stare aperto non sofferse;
8  onde la scorta mia saputa e fida
9  mi s'accostò e l'omero m'offerse.
10  E'en as a blind man goes behind his guide,
11  Lest he should wander, or should strike against
12  Aught that may harm or peradventure kill him,
10  Sì come cieco va dietro a sua guida
11  per non smarrirsi e per non dar di cozzo
12  in cosa che 'l molesti, o forse ancida,
13  So went I through the bitter and foul air,
14  Listening unto my Leader, who said only,
15  "Look that from me thou be not separated."
13  m'andava io per l'aere amaro e sozzo,
14  ascoltando il mio duca che diceva
15  pur: “Guarda che da me tu non sia mozzo.”
16  Voices I heard, and every one appeared
17  To supplicate for peace and misericord
18  The Lamb of God who takes away our sins.
16  Io sentia voci, e ciascuna pareva
17  pregar per pace e per misericordia
18  l'Agnel di Dio che le peccata leva.
19  Still "Agnus Dei" their exordium was;
20  One word there was in all, and metre one,
21  So that all harmony appeared among them.
19  Pur “Agnus Dei” eran le loro essordia;
20  una parola in tutte era e un modo,
21  sì che parea tra esse ogne concordia.
22  "Master," I said, "are spirits those I hear?"
23  And he to me: "Thou apprehendest truly,
24  And they the knot of anger go unloosing."
22  “Quei sono spirti, maestro, ch'i' odo?”
23  diss' io. Ed elli a me: “Tu vero apprendi,
24  e d'iracundia van solvendo il nodo.”
25  "Now who art thou, that cleavest through our smoke
26  And art discoursing of us even as though
27  Thou didst by calends still divide the time?"
25  “Or tu chi se' che 'l nostro fummo fendi,
26  e di noi parli pur come se tue
27  partissi ancor lo tempo per calendi?”
28  After this manner by a voice was spoken;
29  Whereon my Master said: "Do thou reply,
30  And ask if on this side the way go upward."
28  Così per una voce detto fue;
29  onde 'l maestro mio disse: “Rispondi,
30  e domanda se quinci si va sùe.”
31  And I: "O creature that dost cleanse thyself
32  To return beautiful to Him who made thee,
33  Thou shalt hear marvels if thou follow me."
31  E io: “O creatura che ti mondi
32  per tornar bella a colui che ti fece,
33  maraviglia udirai, se mi secondi.”
34  "Thee will I follow far as is allowed me,"
35  He answered; "and if smoke prevent our seeing,
36  Hearing shall keep us joined instead thereof."
34  “Io ti seguiterò quanto mi lece,”
35  rispuose; “e se veder fummo non lascia
36  l'udir ci terrà giunti in quella vece.”
37  Thereon began I: "With that swathing band
38  Which death unwindeth am I going upward,
39  And hither came I through the infernal anguish.
37  Allora incominciai: “Con quella fascia
38  che la morte dissolve men vo suso,
39  e venni qui per l'infernale ambascia.
40  And if God in his grace has me infolded,
41  So that he wills that I behold his court
42  By method wholly out of modern usage,
40  E se Dio m'ha in sua grazia rinchiuso,
41  tanto che vuol ch'i' veggia la sua corte
42  per modo tutto fuor del moderno uso,
43  Conceal not from me who ere death thou wast,
44  But tell it me, and tell me if I go
45  Right for the pass, and be thy words our escort."
43  non mi celar chi fosti anzi la morte,
44  ma dilmi, e dimmi s'i' vo bene al varco;
45  e tue parole fier le nostre scorte.”
46  "Lombard was I, and I was Marco called;
47  The world I knew, and loved that excellence,
48  At which has each one now unbent his bow.
46  “Lombardo fui, e fu' chiamato Marco;
47  del mondo seppi, e quel valore amai
48  al quale ha or ciascun disteso l'arco.
49  For mounting upward, thou art going right."
50  Thus he made answer, and subjoined: "I pray thee
51  To pray for me when thou shalt be above."
49  Per montar sù dirittamente vai.”
50  Così rispuose, e soggiunse: “I' ti prego
51  che per me prieghi quando sù sarai.”
52  And I to him: "My faith I pledge to thee
53  To do what thou dost ask me; but am bursting
54  Inly with doubt, unless I rid me of it.
52  E io a lui: “Per fede mi ti lego
53  di far ciò che mi chiedi; ma io scoppio
54  dentro ad un dubbio, s'io non me ne spiego.
55  First it was simple, and is now made double
56  By thy opinion, which makes certain to me,
57  Here and elsewhere, that which I couple with it.
55  Prima era scempio, e ora è fatto doppio
56  ne la sentenza tua, che mi fa certo
57  qui, e altrove, quello ov' io l'accoppio.
58  The world forsooth is utterly deserted
59  By every virtue, as thou tellest me,
60  And with iniquity is big and covered;
58  Lo mondo è ben così tutto diserto
59  d'ogne virtute, come tu mi sone,
60  e di malizia gravido e coverto;
61  But I beseech thee point me out the cause,
62  That I may see it, and to others show it;
63  For one in the heavens, and here below one puts it."
61  ma priego che m'addite la cagione,
62  sì ch'i' la veggia e ch'i' la mostri altrui;
63  ché nel cielo uno, e un qua giù la pone.”
64  A sigh profound, that grief forced into Ai!
65  He first sent forth, and then began he: "Brother,
66  The world is blind, and sooth thou comest from it!
64  Alto sospir, che duolo strinse in “uhi!”
65  mise fuor prima; e poi cominciò: “Frate,
66  lo mondo è cieco, e tu vien ben da lui.
67  Ye who are living every cause refer
68  Still upward to the heavens, as if all things
69  They of necessity moved with themselves.
67  Voi che vivete ogne cagion recate
68  pur suso al cielo, pur come se tutto
69  movesse seco di necessitate.
70  If this were so, in you would be destroyed
71  Free will, nor any justice would there be
72  In having joy for good, or grief for evil.
70  Se così fosse, in voi fora distrutto
71  libero arbitrio, e non fora giustizia
72  per ben letizia, e per male aver lutto.
73  The heavens your movements do initiate,
74  I say not all; but granting that I say it,
75  Light has been given you for good and evil,
73  Lo cielo i vostri movimenti inizia;
74  non dico tutti, ma, posto ch'i' 'l dica,
75  lume v'è dato a bene e a malizia,
76  And free volition; which, if some fatigue
77  In the first battles with the heavens it suffers,
78  Afterwards conquers all, if well 'tis nurtured.
76  e libero voler; che, se fatica
77  ne le prime battaglie col ciel dura,
78  poi vince tutto, se ben si notrica.
79  To greater force and to a better nature,
80  Though free, ye subject are, and that creates
81  The mind in you the heavens have not in charge.
79  A maggior forza e a miglior natura
80  liberi soggiacete; e quella cria
81  la mente in voi, che 'l ciel non ha in sua cura.
82  Hence, if the present world doth go astray,
83  In you the cause is, be it sought in you;
84  And I therein will now be thy true spy.
82  Però, se 'l mondo presente disvia,
83  in voi è la cagione, in voi si cheggia;
84  e io te ne sarò or vera spia.
85  Forth from the hand of Him, who fondles it
86  Before it is, like to a little girl
87  Weeping and laughing in her childish sport,
85  Esce di mano a lui che la vagheggia
86  prima che sia, a guisa di fanciulla
87  che piangendo e ridendo pargoleggia,
88  Issues the simple soul, that nothing knows,
89  Save that, proceeding from a joyous Maker,
90  Gladly it turns to that which gives it pleasure.
88  l'anima semplicetta che sa nulla,
89  salvo che, mossa da lieto fattore,
90  volontier torna a ciò che la trastulla.
91  Of trivial good at first it tastes the savour;
92  Is cheated by it, and runs after it,
93  If guide or rein turn not aside its love.
91  Di picciol bene in pria sente sapore;
92  quivi s'inganna, e dietro ad esso corre,
93  se guida o fren non torce suo amore.
94  Hence it behoved laws for a rein to place,
95  Behoved a king to have, who at the least
96  Of the true city should discern the tower.
94  Onde convenne legge per fren porre;
95  convenne rege aver, che discernesse
96  de la vera cittade almen la torre.
97  The laws exist, but who sets hand to them?
98  No one; because the shepherd who precedes
99  Can ruminate, but cleaveth not the hoof;
97  Le leggi son, ma chi pon mano ad esse?
98  Nullo, però che 'l pastor che procede,
99  rugumar può, ma non ha l'unghie fesse;
100  Wherefore the people that perceives its guide
101  Strike only at the good for which it hankers,
102  Feeds upon that, and farther seeketh not.
100  per che la gente, che sua guida vede
101  pur a quel ben fedire ond' ella è ghiotta,
102  di quel si pasce, e più oltre non chiede.
103  Clearly canst thou perceive that evil guidance
104  The cause is that has made the world depraved,
105  And not that nature is corrupt in you.
103  Ben puoi veder che la mala condotta
104  è la cagion che 'l mondo ha fatto reo,
105  e non natura che 'n voi sia corrotta.
106  Rome, that reformed the world, accustomed was
107  Two suns to have, which one road and the other,
108  Of God and of the world, made manifest.
106  Soleva Roma, che 'l buon mondo feo,
107  due soli aver, che l'una e l'altra strada
108  facean vedere, e del mondo e di Deo.
109  One has the other quenched, and to the crosier
110  The sword is joined, and ill beseemeth it
111  That by main force one with the other go,
109  L'un l'altro ha spento; ed è giunta la spada
110  col pasturale, e l'un con l'altro insieme
111  per viva forza mal convien che vada;
112  Because, being joined, one feareth not the other;
113  If thou believe not, think upon the grain,
114  For by its seed each herb is recognized.
112  però che, giunti, l'un l'altro non teme:
113  se non mi credi, pon mente a la spiga,
114  ch'ogn' erba si conosce per lo seme.
115  In the land laved by Po and Adige,
116  Valour and courtesy used to be found,
117  Before that Frederick had his controversy;
115  In sul paese ch'Adice e Po riga,
116  solea valore e cortesia trovarsi,
117  prima che Federigo avesse briga;
118  Now in security can pass that way
119  Whoever will abstain, through sense of shame,
120  From speaking with the good, or drawing near them.
118  or può sicuramente indi passarsi
119  per qualunque lasciasse, per vergogna,
120  di ragionar coi buoni o d'appressarsi.
121  True, three old men are left, in whom upbraids
122  The ancient age the new, and late they deem it
123  That God restore them to the better life:
121  Ben v'èn tre vecchi ancora in cui rampogna
122  l'antica età la nova, e par lor tardo
123  che Dio a miglior vita li ripogna:
124  Currado da Palazzo, and good Gherardo,
125  And Guido da Castel, who better named is,
126  In fashion of the French, the simple Lombard:
124  Currado da Palazzo e 'l buon Gherardo
125  e Guido da Castel, che mei si noma,
130  francescamente, il semplice Lombardo.
127  Say thou henceforward that the Church of Rome,
128  Confounding in itself two governments,
129  Falls in the mire, and soils itself and burden."
127  Dì oggimai che la Chiesa di Roma,
128  per confondere in sé due reggimenti,
129  cade nel fango, e sé brutta e la soma.”
130  "O Marco mine," I said, "thou reasonest well;
131  And now discern I why the sons of Levi
132  Have been excluded from the heritage.
130  “O Marco mio,” diss' io, “bene argomenti;
131  e or discerno perchè dal retaggio
132  li figli di Levì furono essenti.
133  But what Gherardo is it, who, as sample
134  Of a lost race, thou sayest has remained
135  In reprobation of the barbarous age?"
133  Ma qual Gherardo è quel che tu per saggio
134  di' ch'è rimaso de la gente spenta,
135  in rimprovèro del secol selvaggio?”
136  "Either thy speech deceives me, or it tempts me,"
137  He answered me; "for speaking Tuscan to me,
138  It seems of good Gherardo naught thou knowest.
136  “O tuo parlar m'inganna, o el mi tenta”
137  rispuose a me; “ché parlandomi tosco,
138  par che del buon Gherardo nulla senta.
139  By other surname do I know him not,
140  Unless I take it from his daughter Gaia.
141  May God be with you, for I come no farther.
139  Per altro sopranome io nol conosco,
140  s'io nol togliessi da sua figlia Gaia.
141  Dio sia con voi, ché più non vegno vosco.
142  Behold the dawn, that through the smoke rays out,
143  Already whitening; and I must depart—
144  Yonder the Angel is—ere he appear."
102  Vedi l'albor che per lo fummo raia
143  già biancheggiare, e me convien partirmi
144  (l'angelo è ivi) prima ch'io li paia.”

145  Thus did he speak, and would no farther hear me.
145  Così tornò, e più non volle udirmi.
Canto XVII
In a not atypical maneuver, Dante begins Canto XVII of the Purgatorio by creating a linguistic caliper for the depths and heights of the imagination: the mole below the dirt, the moutain's heights, the sinking sun above, the death of light upon of the shores below.  In Purgatorio XV words denoting seeming, appearing, apparently predominate, in Canto XVI, words denoting reason saturate the text, here variations of the word imagination infuse his verses.  We may surmise from their places lower to higher on the mountain how he values each of these attributes, and we may also surmise from his swooning, not for the first time in the Commedia, that there is something autistic about both the spiritual aspirant and the poet, as again and again his consciousness deserts the physical body, to journey inside this already inward journey.  When the senses are closed, as the sense of sight is in the mole or for the shades and the aspirant in the previous cantos on Envy and Wrath, the imagination, a light from heaven, or even more profoundly, since we have just, in the last canto so thoroughly explored the topic, the Free Will of that entity who distributes light, one may enter an entirely different realm, a realm, sometimes called astral, which is not subject to all those slings and arrows so tormenting to the flesh, but which may depict all the qualities, either joyous or tormenting, in a state of rapture, completely impervious to harm.  This is the absorbed reader's realm, and here, his or her imagination joins with that of the creative poet and the creator, in a heaven which enjoys all things, suffers all things, in that state transcending physical sensation, and even ordinary emotion, which the masters refer to as bliss. 

There seems to be a hierachical relationship between what the free will creates, in the case cited here in lines 17 - 18, between the Free Will and God, i.e., as Wallace Stevens phrases it "the will of wills."  Here, the celestial bodies influence us as fate or destiny in the astrological sense,  but what sets these mechanisms in motion is the Free Will of the imagination.  This latter is free, entity-like, not subject to any law but that law which it chooses to enact its Will in the moment, while the former is teleological, a clock-work mechanism, that may can continue without the attentions of the will which created them.  Any one who does creative work, or who treats their work creatively, has had the experience of recieving an impluse seemingly out of nowhere (grace), and then, as an opertion of free will, chosing to attend to this impluse.  After, we experience how that impulse continues to elaborate itself, almost as a complete automaticity.  Such visions unfold silently in a totally interior state, and here Dante's sees the nightengale (the transformed Procne), as a kind of visible source of singing which does not in any way intrude upon his quietude.

In the beginning of this canto, we are still in the terrace of Wrath, and the 3 visions that enclosed the aspiratnt in his divine imagination-bubble, that of Procne, Haman, and Amata, act as a single unfolding metaphor, of a type we have seen before in the poem.  Together these three visions present a conflated picture of the three types of violence already defined in the Inferno: violence against oneself, against others, and against God (fate, circumstance).  It is important to note that none of these victims of wrath are named but only periphrastically alluded to, as are their stories, a wierd kind of technique which depends on the fame of the exemplars and at the same time, by refusing to directly name them, an indirect assertion that such fame is undeserving and should be denied.  The reader either already knows who is being alluded to or they must reseach their stories.  Sometimes I think of such situations as the porosity of the text.  A text with little porosity is self-contained, and does not require or refer to texts beyond itself, a text of high porostiy, is intruded upon and saturated with many references outside of itself.  The measurement is subjective, as it is determined by how little or how great is the individual reader's background of general knowledge and experience.  Because the Commedia gains a high degree of resonance with whole worlds of experiences of myth, philosophy, history, geography, nature, scripture and so forth, only alluded to by its text, it can be said to have a very high degree of porosity.  The more each reader discovers about the allusions, the greater the reach of resonance the poem has for them.  Hence the value of commentary, a kind of communal or transpersonal reading that in each generation adds more meaning to the poem.  Procne is turned into a nightengale as a result of her murder of her sister's rapist's son.  Haman, the prime minister of king Ahasuerus, because of Mordecai's refusal to bow down to him, propsed to have all the jews in the kingdom executed.  But when the king's wife, Esther, appeals to the king, it is Haman who is crucified, while Mordecai looks on.  Amata commits suicide after her machinations to prevent her daughter from marrying a suitor not of her mother's choice, starts a war in which she believes the intended suitor is killed.  These divinely inspired visions, illustrate why wrath is different than, say, self-righteous anger as the result of an injustice, in that this sin of Wrath is characterized by some desire for vengeance, vendetta.  If violence is a sort of infection spread by the need for vengeance, then foregiveness (think Lincoln's "with malice towards none, with charity for all) is the method by which the cycle of violence is halted, and the spread of this disease curtailed.  The three metaphors develop thusly: singing that is seen, seeing that is silence — the bursting bubble — then vision accompanied by the sound of weeping and then of words (lines 35 - 39).  At this point, the aspirant emerges from his astral journey, by the intusion of — what else? — light.  The light is that of a being so bright, that its own light conceals itself, and from this angelic effulgence, comes the answer to the unasked question: How do we proceed?  The answer is directional, or heirarchcal: Ascend.  The words "Qui si monta" are an awakening, and the light of the one who pronounced them acts on the aspirant as sunlight acts on a plant, he has only one desire, to follow, to feed on that source.  This light of this angel is Providence, literally the grace of foreseeing, and Virgil's words here emphasize the distinction between a guide who maliciously waits for the question to be posed, suspending fulfillment, with the possibility of a refusal or even by ignoring the need of the aspirant, to one who feels in themselves the need of the aspirant, and fulfills that need before it pustules into a cry for help.  At this point in the canto, the stairway to the next level appears, and at this point too, is where the aspirant has no other desire except to ascend.  A wing brushes the aspirant, and the words "Blessed are the peacemakers" (Beati pacifici) are heard, and it is here that the last vestiges of Wrath are gently swept away, along with the strength, which Wrath often gives those who indulge it.  The wingsweep of this being erases the "P" of Wrath from the aspirant's forehead.  (Note to ponder: When Pride is gone, a weight is lifted, when Wrath goes, a weight descends — Why?).  Now the protagonists, reaching a level plateau on the stairway they are climbing, come to rest — like a ship come to port at nightfall.  In this peaceful pause, the aspirant's questioning mind, has surrendered its former sense of prodding urgency, and he can ask, without anxiety, what sin this new circle expunges.  The tone of the poem has changed, and Virgil's explanation proceeds almost like a bedtime story for a groggy, inquisative child.  This is a tone of lassitude, and it befits the place they have reached: the circle excising sloth. It is also an assertion, that even evil has it's source in love.   Virgil than summaries and succinctly defines the sins that lie below them on the mountain: The sin of Pride, the lowest and most egregious, being the love of exultation by belittling others, the sin of Envy, the love of honor despoiled by the feat that anothers honor must besmirch one's own, and the sin of Wrath, the love of justice, wherein one demands a punishing retribution for a percieved injustice.  The canto concludes with a foreshadowning of the sins of "excessive love" (L'amor ch'ad esso troppo), which lie above the circle of Sloth.  Sloth then is the central sin, as this canto is also one of the two central cantos of the entire Commedia, around whose still center, whirls all the poem.  One might also add, that a poem of 100 cantos' barycenter is between canto 50 and canto 51.  We might call this the negative center, but the positive center would be split, like the two suns we examined in the previous canto, one rotating at the center of canto 50 (line 73: Lo cielo i vostri movimenti inizia (The heavens your movements do initiate, and its twin at the center of canto 51 (lines 70-71 Già eran sovra noi tanto levati /  li ultimi raggi che la notte segue, (already over us are upliftd / the lasts sunrays which night will follow).

At the conclusion of this canto, Virgil's words trail off, leaving the aspirant, and the reader, in a state of contemplation.       

1  Remember, Reader, if e'er in the Alps
2  A mist o'ertook thee, through which thou couldst see
3  Not otherwise than through its membrane mole,

1  Ricorditi, lettor, se mai ne l'alpe
2  ti colse nebbia per la qual vedessi
3  non altrimenti che per pelle talpe,

4  How, when the vapours humid and condensed
5  Begin to dissipate themselves, the sphere
6  Of the sun feebly enters in among them,

4  come, quando i vapori umidi e spessi
5  a diradar cominciansi, la spera
6  del sol debilemente entra per essi;

7  And thy imagination will be swift
8  In coming to perceive how I re-saw
9  The sun at first, that was already setting.

7  e fia la tua imagine leggera
8  in giugnere a veder com' io rividi
9  lo sole in pria, che già nel corcar era.

10  Thus, to the faithful footsteps of my Master
11  Mating mine own, I issued from that cloud
12  To rays already dead on the low shores.

10  Sì, pareggiando i miei co' passi fidi
11  del mio maestro, usci' fuor di tal nube
12  ai raggi morti già ne' bassi lidi.

13  O thou, Imagination, that dost steal us
14  So from without sometimes, that man perceives not,
15  Although around may sound a thousand trumpets,

13  O imaginativa che ne rube
14  talvolta sì di fuor, ch'om non s'accorge
15  perché dintorno suonin mille tube,

16  Who moveth thee, if sense impel thee not?
17  Moves thee a light, which in the heaven takes form,
18  By self, or by a will that downward guides it.

16  chi move te, se 'l senso non ti porge?
17  Moveti lume che nel ciel s'informa,
18  per sé o per voler che giù lo scorge.

19  Of her impiety, who changed her form
20  Into the bird that most delights in singing,
21  In my imagining appeared the trace;

19  De l'empiezza di lei che mutò forma
20  ne l'uccel ch'a cantar più si diletta,
21  ne l'imagine mia apparve l'orma;

22  And hereupon my mind was so withdrawn
23  Within itself, that from without there came
24  Nothing that then might be received by it.

22  e qui fu la mia mente sì ristretta
23  dentro da sé, che di fuor non venìa
24  cosa che fosse allor da lei ricetta.

25  Then reigned within my lofty fantasy
26  One crucified, disdainful and ferocious
27  In countenance, and even thus was dying.

25  Poi piovve dentro a l'alta fantasia
26  un crucifisso, dispettoso e fero
27  ne la sua vista, e cotal si moria;

28  Around him were the great Ahasuerus,
29  Esther his wife, and the just Mordecai,
30  Who was in word and action so entire.

28  intorno ad esso era il grande Assüero,
29  Estèr sua sposa e 'l giusto Mardoceo,
30  che fu al dire e al far così intero.

31  And even as this image burst asunder
32  Of its own self, in fashion of a bubble
33  In which the water it was made of fails,

31  E come questa imagine rompeo
32  sé per sé stessa, a guisa d'una bulla
33  cui manca l'acqua sotto qual si feo,

34  There rose up in my vision a young maiden
35  Bitterly weeping, and she said: "O queen,
36  Why hast thou wished in anger to be naught?

34  surse in mia visione una fanciulla
35  piangendo forte, e dicea: “O regina,
36  perché per ira hai voluto esser nulla?

37  Thou'st slain thyself, Lavinia not to lose;
38  Now hast thou lost me; I am she who mourns,
39  Mother, at thine ere at another's ruin."

37  Ancisa t'hai per non perder Lavina;
38  or m'hai perduta! Io son essa che lutto,
39  madre, a la tua pria ch'a l'altrui ruina.”

40 As sleep is broken, when upon a sudden
41  New light strikes in upon the eyelids closed,
42  And broken quivers ere it dieth wholly,

40  Come si frange il sonno ove di butto
41  nova luce percuote il viso chiuso,
42  che fratto guizza pria che muoia tutto;

43  So this imagining of mine fell down
44  As soon as the effulgence smote my face,
45  Greater by far than what is in our wont.

43  così l'imaginar mio cadde giuso
44  tosto che lume il volto mi percosse,
45  maggior assai che quel ch'è in nostro uso.

46  I turned me round to see where I might be,
47  When said a voice, "Here is the passage up;"
48  Which from all other purposes removed me,

46  I' mi volgea per veder ov' io fosse,
47  quando una voce disse “Qui si monta,”
48  che da ogne altro intento mi rimosse;

49  And made my wish so full of eagerness
50  To look and see who was it that was speaking,
51  It never rests till meeting face to face;

49  e fece la mia voglia tanto pronta
50  di riguardar chi era che parlava,
51  che mai non posa, se non si raffronta.

52  But as before the sun, which quells the sight,
53  And in its own excess its figure veils,
54  Even so my power was insufficient here.

52  Ma come al sol che nostra vista grava
53  e per soverchio sua figura vela,
54  così la mia virtù quivi mancava.

55  "This is a spirit divine, who in the way
56  Of going up directs us without asking,
57  And who with his own light himself conceals.

55  “Questo è divino spirito, che ne la
56  via da ir sù ne drizza sanza prego,
57  e col suo lume sé medesmo cela.

58  He does with us as man doth with himself;
59  For he who sees the need, and waits the asking,
60  Malignly leans already tow'rds denial.

58  Sì fa con noi, come l'uom si fa sego;
59  ché quale aspetta prego e l'uopo vede,
60  malignamente già si mette al nego.

61  Accord we now our feet to such inviting,
62  Let us make haste to mount ere it grow dark;
63  For then we could not till the day return."

61  Or accordiamo a tanto invito il piede;
62  procacciam di salir pria che s'abbui,
63  ché poi non si poria, se 'l dì non riede.”

64  Thus my Conductor said; and I and he
65  Together turned our footsteps to a stairway;
66  And I, as soon as the first step I reached,

64  Così disse il mio duca, e io con lui
65  volgemmo i nostri passi ad una scala;
66  e tosto ch'io al primo grado fui,

67  Near me perceived a motion as of wings,
68  And fanning in the face, and saying, "'Beati
69  Pacifici,' who are without ill anger."

67  senti'mi presso quasi un muover d'ala
68  e ventarmi nel viso e dir: “Beati
69  pacifici, che son sanz' ira mala!”

70  Already over us were so uplifted
71  The latest sunbeams, which the night pursues,
72  That upon many sides the stars appeared.

70  Già eran sovra noi tanto levati
71  li ultimi raggi che la notte segue,
72  che le stelle apparivan da più lati.

73  "O manhood mine, why dost thou vanish so?"
74  I said within myself; for I perceived
75  The vigour of my legs was put in truce.

73 “O virtù mia, perché sì ti dilegue?”
74  fra me stesso dicea, ché mi sentiva
75  la possa de le gambe posta in triegue.

76  We at the point were where no more ascends
77  The stairway upward, and were motionless,
78  Even as a ship, which at the shore arrives;

76  Noi eravam dove più non saliva
77  la scala sù, ed eravamo affissi,
78  pur come nave ch'a la piaggia arriva.

79  And I gave heed a little, if I might hear
80  Aught whatsoever in the circle new;
81  Then to my Master turned me round and said:

79  E io attesi un poco, s'io udissi
80  alcuna cosa nel novo girone;
81  poi mi volsi al maestro mio, e dissi:

82  "Say, my sweet Father, what delinquency
83  Is purged here in the circle where we are?
84  Although our feet may pause, pause not thy speech."

82  “Dolce mio padre, dì, quale offensione
83  si purga qui nel giro dove semo?
84  Se i piè si stanno, non stea tuo sermone.”

85  And he to me: "The love of good, remiss
86  In what it should have done, is here restored;
87  Here plied again the ill-belated oar;

85  Ed elli a me: “L'amor del bene, scemo
86  del suo dover, quiritta si ristora;
87  qui si ribatte il mal tardato remo.

88  But still more openly to understand,
89  Turn unto me thy mind, and thou shalt gather
90  Some profitable fruit from our delay.

88  Ma perché più aperto intendi ancora,
89  volgi la mente a me, e prenderai
90  alcun buon frutto di nostra dimora.”

91  Neither Creator nor a creature ever,
92  Son," he began, "was destitute of love
93  Natural or spiritual; and thou knowest it.

91  “Né creator né creatura mai,”
92  cominciò el, “figliuol, fu sanza amore,
93  o naturale o d'animo; e tu 'l sai.

94  The natural was ever without error;
95  But err the other may by evil object,
96  Or by too much, or by too little vigour.

94  Lo naturale è sempre sanza errore,
95  ma l'altro puote errar per malo obietto
96  o per troppo o per poco di vigore.

97  While in the first it well directed is,
98  And in the second moderates itself,
99  It cannot be the cause of sinful pleasure;

97  Mentre ch'elli è nel primo ben diretto,
98  e ne' secondi sé stesso misura,
99  esser non può cagion di mal diletto;

100  But when to ill it turns, and, with more care
101  Or lesser than it ought, runs after good,
102  'Gainst the Creator works his own creation.

100  ma quando al mal si torce, o con più cura
101 o con men che non dee corre nel bene,
102 contra 'l fattore adovra sua fattura.

103  Hence thou mayst comprehend that love must be
104  The seed within yourselves of every virtue,
105  And every act that merits punishment.

103  Quinci comprender puoi ch'esser convene
104  amor sementa in voi d'ogne virtute
105  e d'ogne operazion che merta pene.

106  Now inasmuch as never from the welfare
107  Of its own subject can love turn its sight,
108  From their own hatred all things are secure;

106  Or, perché mai non può da la salute
107  amor del suo subietto volger viso,
108  da l'odio proprio son le cose tute;

109  And since we cannot think of any being
110  Standing alone, nor from the First divided,
111  Of hating Him is all desire cut off.

109  e perché intender non si può diviso,
110  e per sé stante, alcuno esser dal primo,
111  da quello odiare ogne effetto è deciso.

112  Hence if, discriminating, I judge well,
113  The evil that one loves is of one's neighbour,
114  And this is born in three modes in your clay.

112  Resta, se dividendo bene stimo,
113  che 'l mal che s'ama è del prossimo; ed esso
114  amor nasce in tre modi in vostro limo.

115  There are, who, by abasement of their neighbour,
116  Hope to excel, and therefore only long
117  That from his greatness he may be cast down;

115  É chi, per esser suo vicin soppresso,
116  spera eccellenza, e sol per questo brama
117  ch'el sia di sua grandezza in basso messo;

118  There are, who power, grace, honour, and renown
119  Fear they may lose because another rises,
120  Thence are so sad that the reverse they love;

118  è chi podere, grazia, onore e fama
119  teme di perder perch' altri sormonti,
120  onde s'attrista sì che 'l contrario ama;

121  And there are those whom injury seems to chafe,
122  So that it makes them greedy for revenge,
123  And such must needs shape out another's harm.

121  ed è chi per ingiuria par ch'aonti,
122  sì che si fa de la vendetta ghiotto,
123  e tal convien che 'l male altrui impronti.

124  This threefold love is wept for down below;
125  Now of the other will I have thee hear,
126  That runneth after good with measure faulty.

124  Questo triforme amor qua giù di sotto
125  si piange: or vo' che tu de l'altro intende,
126  che corre al ben con ordine corrotto.

127  Each one confusedly a good conceives
128  Wherein the mind may rest, and longeth for it;
129  Therefore to overtake it each one strives.

127  Ciascun confusamente un bene apprende
128  nel qual si queti l'animo, e disira;
129  per che di giugner lui ciascun contende.

130  If languid love to look on this attract you,
131  Or in attaining unto it, this cornice,
132  After just penitence, torments you for it.

130  Se lento amore a lui veder vi tira
131  o a lui acquistar, questa cornice,
132  dopo giusto penter, ve ne martira.

133  There's other good that does not make man happy;
135  'Tis not felicity, 'tis not the good
136  Essence, of every good the fruit and root.

133  Altro ben è che non fa l'uom felice;
134  non è felicità, non è la buona
135  essenza, d'ogne ben frutto e radice.

136  The love that yields itself too much to this
137  Above us is lamented in three circles;
138  But how tripartite it may be described,

136  L'amor ch'ad esso troppo s'abbandona,
137  di sovr' a noi si piange per tre cerchi;
138  ma come tripartito si ragiona,

139  I say not, that thou seek it for thyself."

139  tacciolo, acciò che tu per te ne cerchi.”



Canto XVIII
Can the senses, innate in all of us, be said to love, or in less inflammatory parlance, can they have an affinity for the impressions that they convey to the organism?  Do the eyes love seeing, the ears hearing, the skin feeling, the tongue tasting, the nose smelling?  This canto, as does the previous one, to which it is seamlessly attached, is saturated with philosophical discourse about love, but does it really express love?  (One thinks of Bergson's book on Laughter, and how unfunny it is.)  The answer to that question is: No.  And I would venture to say, it is not meant to.  I make that statement from Virgil's remark, echoing other times when his cool reason stops short of embodying with emotion his discourses on emotion.  The answer to that question will not be a philosophical one, but rather a statement, if we can call it such, of the sheer wonder of Beatrice's presence.  In a way, the aspirant, Dante, in his almost breathless need to milk Virgil for a rational demonstration of the various aspect of love, stands in stark contrast, in its tone, to the sort of pagan dignity of Virgil's anachronistically Thomistic explanations.  Love is a passion, not an explanation, and if we would understand that passion, we need only refer to Dante's Vita Nuova, wherein he writes while in its throes, and not as he writes here, through his mouthpiece, Virgil, as one who seeks a balm for the passion that has so scorched him.  Indeed, this passion is what has the set entire journey of the Commedia into motion.  Here is Mark Musa's translation of two passages from that earlier, seminal work which display the starkness of this difference:

I must tell you that whenever and wherever she appeared, I, in anticipation of her miraculous greeting, could not have considered any man my enemy; on the contrary, a flame of charity was lit within me and made me forgive whoever had offended me.  And if, at his moment, anyone has asked me about anything, I could only have answered, my face all kindness: "Love."  And when she was about to greet me, one of Love's spirits, annihilating all the others of the senses, would drive out the feeble spirits of sight, saying to them, "Go and pay homage to your mistress," and Love would take their place.  And if anyone had wished to know Love, he might had done so by looking at my glistening eyes.   And when this most gracious one greeted me, Love was no medium capable of tempering my unbearable bliss, but rather, as if possessed of an excess of sweetness, he became so powerful that my body, which was completely under his rule, often moved like a heavy, inanimate object.  By now it should be most evident that in her salutation dwelt my bliss, a bliss often exceeded by my capacity to contain it.

***

I raised my eyes and, looking at the ladies, I saw among them the most gracious Beatrice.  Then my spirits were so disrupted by the strength Love acquired when he saw himself this close to the most gracious lady, that none survived except the spirits of sight; and even these were driven forth, because Love desired to occupy their enviable post in order to behold the marvelous lady.  And even though I was not quite myself, I was still very sorry for these little spirits who bitterly protested, saying: "if this one had not thrust us from our place like a bolt of lightning, we could have stayed to see the wonders of this lady as all our peers are doing."

That we are in Purgatory, and on the wrong side of this question of love, trying to stack step by step arguments to reach the unattainable stars, is the whole irony of this canto, as the spirits, attempting to erase the stain of their laggard dispositions, are on a perpetual run.  They run and run, but in circles, attempting to acquire enough ground speed to eventually attain that air speed which might lift them into flight.  In some ways, to me, this is one of the saddest of the Canto's, because the aspiration to be in love, and yet to be denied the fulfillment of that transcendent emotion, cannot be satiated by any philosophical explanation.  Then perhaps we might ask ourselves: Is it futile to run after grace?  In short, is this impatience to grab what may only annihilate us like a "lightning bolt' a form of impatience, which, after a time, when left unsatisfied, lies crestfallen in that hopelessness that we feel as sloth?  A heaviness not born in the wake of the overwhelming experience of Love, but of the exhaustion which comes from fruitlessly seeking it.

Is it from these passages of the Vita Nuova, and not from Virgil's explanations, that we may have a foretaste of the experience that awaits us at the zenith of Paradise?  Yes ... but ...

The love that Dante describes in the Vita Nuova is not the only kind of love that moves us.  There are loves, though milder, which still run quite deep, and one of these cooler forms of love is much on desplay here. This is the love of understanding, the love that loves to make sense of the senses, the love that orders the chaos of knowledge into an harmonious wisdom.  This kind of love, perhaps represented by the prefix "philo" as in the world philosophy, is imparted by a teacher, who preceding us in this love, which has no taint of jealosy, no need to exclusively possess, may guide us by a softer, but hardly less potent kind of affection.  This is the love of the sincere student for his teacher.  And the affection that Dante and Virgil have for one another, an affection which has sustained the two of them throughout this whole arduous journey, has it's own special kind of purity.  That point is enphasized here, when Dante, silent, but possessing in his mind more burning questions, is answered before he asks.  By this means the poet, Dante, equates Virgil's love for him with that special love spoken of in the previous canto, a love, almost angelic in its purity.  And, in addition to the poignancy of the running sinners, there is a wondrous kind of poignancy here too, and it revolves as well around the figure of Beatrice.  Virgil, for all his love of Dante, again here, as he has done before, defers the most vital of his chela's questions to Beatrice, and it is this unselfish action, an action in which he loses much, in order that his charge will gain more than he himself could ever hope to.  We may call this Virgil's loving sacrifice, always giving the best that he is, the best that he knows, for love of his protégé.  And doesn't this move us, as readers, even more than the weight of Virgil's arguments?  If sloth is a kind of laggardness in persuing love, and the hurry of the sinners on this cornice, is an exemplar of its cure, then sloth too is the enemy of that quieter current of love that more gently flows all through the Commedia, a current that stays hidden, sudues the turbulance of destructive passions, and, though ever present, ever comforting, even in the worst, the most violent, the most wrenching of circumstances, it "never faileth."  Indeed, its stength is such that it overcomes the very terrors of Hell.  This is the love exemplified that in this canto sustains the aspirant, even as fatigue overtakes him.  This is the love that links Virgil and Dante.  It a love that connects them, a love the marries past and present, dead and living.  It is the love of poetry.  And if we are reading this great poem as we should be reading it, we should be feeling that love as it flows between Dante and ourselves.    

1  An end had put unto his reasoning
2  The lofty Teacher, and attent was looking
3  Into my face, if I appeared content;

1  Posto avea fine al suo ragionamento
2  l'alto dottore, e attento guardava
3  ne la mia vista s'io parea contento;

4  And I, whom a new thirst still goaded on,
5  Without was mute, and said within: "Perchance
6  The too much questioning I make annoys him."

4  e io, cui nova sete ancor frugava,
5  di fuor tacea, e dentro dicea: “Forse
6  lo troppo dimandar ch'io fo li grava.”

7  But that true Father, who had comprehended
8  The timid wish, that opened not itself,
9  By speaking gave me hardihood to speak.

7  Ma quel padre verace, che s'accorse
8  del timido voler che non s'apriva,
9  parlando, di parlare ardir mi porse.

10  Whence I: "My sight is, Master, vivified
11  So in thy light, that clearly I discern
12  Whate'er thy speech importeth or describes.

10  Ond'io: “Maestro, il mio veder s'avviva
11  sì nel tuo lume, ch'io discerno chiaro
12  quanto la tua ragion parta o descriva.

13  Therefore I thee entreat, sweet Father dear,
14  To teach me love, to which thou dost refer
15  Every good action and its contrary."

13  Però ti prego, dolce padre caro,
14  che mi dimostri amore, a cui reduci
15  ogne buono operare e 'l suo contraro.”

16  "Direct," he said, "towards me the keen eyes
17  Of intellect, and clear will be to thee
18  The error of the blind, who would be leaders.

16  “Drizza,” disse, “ver' me l'agute luci
17  de lo 'ntelletto, e fieti manifesto
18  l'error de' ciechi che si fanno duci.

19  The soul, which is created apt to love,
20   Is mobile unto everything that pleases,
21   Soon as by pleasure she is waked to action.

19  L'animo, ch'è creato ad amar presto,
20  ad ogne cosa è mobile che piace,
21  tosto che dal piacere in atto è desto.

22  Your apprehension from some real thing
23   An image draws, and in yourselves displays it
24   So that it makes the soul turn unto it.

22  Vostra apprensiva da esser verace
23  tragge intenzione, e dentro a voi la spiega,
24  sì che l'animo ad essa volger face;

25  And if, when turned, towards it she incline,
26  Love is that inclination; it is nature,
27  Which is by pleasure bound in you anew

25  e se, rivolto, inver' di lei si piega,
26  quel piegare è amor, quell' è natura
27  che per piacer di novo in voi si lega.

28  Then even as the fire doth upward move
29  By its own form, which to ascend is born,
30  Where longest in its matter it endures,

28  Poi, come 'l foco movesi in altura
29  per la sua forma ch'è nata a salire
30  là dove più in sua matera dura,

31  So comes the captive soul into desire,
32   Which is a motion spiritual, and ne'er rests
33  Until she doth enjoy the thing beloved.

31  così l'animo preso entra in disire,
32  ch'è moto spiritale, e mai non posa
33  fin che la cosa amata il fa gioire.

34  Now may apparent be to thee how hidden
35   The truth is from those people, who aver
36   All love is in itself a laudable thing;

34  Or ti puote apparer quant' è nascosa
35  la veritate a la gente ch'avvera
36  ciascun amore in sé laudabil cosa;

37  Because its matter may perchance appear
38  Aye to be good; but yet not each impression
39  Is good, albeit good may be the wax."

37  però che forse appar la sua matera
38  sempre esser buona, ma non ciascun segno
39  è buono, ancor che buona sia la cera.”

40  "Thy words, and my sequacious intellect,"
41  I answered him, "have love revealed to me;
42  But that has made me more impregned with doubt;

40 “Le tue parole e 'l mio seguace ingegno,”
41  rispuos' io lui, “m'hanno amor discoverto,
42  ma ciò m'ha fatto di dubbiar più pregno;

43  For if love from without be offered us,
44  And with another foot the soul go not,
45  If right or wrong she go, 'tis not her merit."

43  ché, s'amore è di fuori a noi offerto
44  e l'anima non va con altro piede,
45  se dritta o torta va, non è suo merto.”
46  And he to me: "What reason seeth here,
47  Myself can tell thee; beyond that await
48  For Beatrice, since 'tis a work of faith.

46  Ed elli a me: “Quanto ragion qui vede,
47  dir ti poss' io; da indi in là t'aspetta
48  pur a Beatrice, ch'è opra di fede.

49  Every substantial form, that segregate
50  From matter is, and with it is united,
51  Specific power has in itself collected,

49  Ogne forma sustanzïal, che setta
50  è da matera ed è con lei unita,
51  specifica vertute ha in sé colletta,

52  Which without act is not perceptible,
53  Nor shows itself except by its effect,
54  As life does in a plant by the green leaves.

52  la qual sanza operar non è sentita,
53  né si dimostra mai che per effetto,
54  come per verdi fronde in pianta vita.

55  But still, whence cometh the intelligence
56  Of the first notions, man is ignorant,
57  And the affection for the first allurements,

55  Però, là onde vegna lo 'ntelletto
56  de le prime notizie, omo non sape,
57  e de' primi appetibili l'affetto,

58  Which are in you as instinct in the bee
59  To make its honey; and this first desire
60  Merit of praise or blame containeth not.

58  che sono in voi sì come studio in ape
59  di far lo mele; e questa prima voglia
60  merto di lode o di biasmo non cape.

61  Now, that to this all others may be gathered,
62  Innate within you is the power that counsels,
63  And it should keep the threshold of assent.

61  Or perché a questa ogn' altra si raccoglia
62  innata v'è la virtù che consiglia,
63  e de l'assenso de' tener la soglia.

64  This is the principle, from which is taken
65  Occasion of desert in you, according
66  As good and guilty loves it takes and winnows.

64  Quest' è 'l principio là onde si piglia
65  ragion di meritare in voi, secondo
66  che buoni e rei amori accoglie e viglia.

67  Those who, in reasoning, to the bottom went,
68  Were of this innate liberty aware,
69  Therefore bequeathed they Ethics to the world.

67  Color che ragionando andaro al fondo,
68  s'accorser d'esta innata libertate;
69  però moralità lasciaro al mondo.

70  Supposing, then, that from necessity
71  Springs every love that is within you kindled,
72  Within yourselves the power is to restrain it.

70  Onde, poniam che di necessitate
71  surga ogne amor che dentro a voi s'accende,
72  di ritenerlo è in voi la podestate.

73  The noble virtue Beatrice understands
74  By the free will; and therefore see that thou
75  Bear it in mind, if she should speak of it."

73  La nobile virtù Beatrice intende
74  per lo libero arbitrio, e però guarda
75  che l'abbi a mente, s'a parlar ten prende.”

76  The moon, belated almost unto midnight,
77  Now made the stars appear to us more rare,
78  Formed like a bucket, that is all ablaze,

76  La luna, quasi a mezza notte tarda,
77  facea le stelle a noi parer più rade,
78  fatta com' un secchion che tuttor arda;

79  And counter to the heavens ran through those paths
80  Which the sun sets aflame, when he of Rome
81  Sees it 'twixt Sardes and Corsicans go down;

79  e correa contra 'l ciel per quelle strade
80  che 'l sole infiamma allor che quel da Roma
81  tra ' Sardi e ' Corsi il vede quando cade.

82  And that patrician shade, for whom is named
83  Pietola more than any Mantuan town,
84  Had laid aside the burden of my lading;

82  E quell' ombra gentil per cui si noma
83  Pietola più che villa mantoana,
84  del mio carcar diposta avea la soma;

85  Whence I, who reason manifest and plain
86  In answer to my questions had received,
87  Stood like a man in drowsy reverie.

85  per ch'io, che la ragione aperta e piana
86  sovra le mie quistioni avea ricolta,
87  stava com' om che sonnolento vana.

88  But taken from me was this drowsiness
89  Suddenly by a people, that behind
90  Our backs already had come round to us.

88  Ma questa sonnolenza mi fu tolta
89  subitamente da gente che dopo
90  le nostre spalle a noi era già volta.

91  And as, of old, Ismenus and Asopus
92  Beside them saw at night the rush and throng,
93  If but the Thebans were in need of Bacchus,

91  E quale Ismeno già vide e Asopo
92  lungo di sé di notte furia e calca,
93  pur che i Teban di Bacco avesser uopo,

94  So they along that circle curve their step,
95  From what I saw of those approaching us,
96  Who by good-will and righteous love are ridden.

94  cotal per quel giron suo passo falca,
95  per quel ch'io vidi di color, venendo,
96  cui buon volere e giusto amor cavalca.

97  Full soon they were upon us, because running
98  Moved onward all that mighty multitude,
99  And two in the advance cried out, lamenting,

97  Tosto fur sovr' a noi, perché correndo
98  si movea tutta quella turba magna;
99  e due dinanzi gridavan piangendo:

100  "Mary in haste unto the mountain ran,
101  And Caesar, that he might subdue Ilerda,
102  Thrust at Marseilles, and then ran into Spain."

100  “Maria corse con fretta a la montagna;
101 e Cesare, per soggiogare Ilerda,
102 punse Marsilia e poi corse in Ispagna.”

103  "Quick! quick! so that the time may not be lost
104  By little love!" forthwith the others cried,
105  "For ardour in well-doing freshens grace!"

103  “Ratto, ratto, che 'l tempo non si perda
104  per poco amor,” gridavan li altri appresso,
105  “che studio di ben far grazia rinverda.”

106  "O folk, in whom an eager fervour now
107  Supplies perhaps delay and negligence,
108  Put by you in well-doing, through lukewarmness,

106  “O gente in cui fervore aguto adesso
107  ricompie forse negligenza e indugio
108  da voi per tepidezza in ben far messo,

109  This one who lives, and truly I lie not,
110  Would fain go up, if but the sun relight us;
111  So tell us where the passage nearest is."

109  questi che vive, e certo i' non vi bugio,
110  vuole andar sù, pur che 'l sol ne riluca;
111  però ne dite ond' è presso il pertugio.”

112  These were the words of him who was my Guide;
113  And some one of those spirits said: "Come on
114  Behind us, and the opening shalt thou find;

112  Parole furon queste del mio duca;
112  e un di quelli spirti disse: “Vieni
113  di retro a noi, e troverai la buca.

115  So full of longing are we to move onward,
116  That stay we cannot; therefore pardon us,
117  If thou for churlishness our justice take.

115  Noi siam di voglia a muoverci sì pieni,
116  che restar non potem; però perdona,
117  se villania nostra giustizia tieni.
118  I was San Zeno's Abbot at Verona,
119  Under the empire of good Barbarossa,
120  Of whom still sorrowing Milan holds discourse;

118  Io fui abate in San Zeno a Verona
119  sotto lo 'mperio del buon Barbarossa,
120  di cui dolente ancor Milan ragiona.

121  And he has one foot in the grave already,
122  Who shall erelong lament that monastery,
123  And sorry be of having there had power,

121  E tale ha già l'un piè dentro la fossa,
122  che tosto piangerà quel monastero,
123  e tristo fia d'avere avuta possa;

124  Because his son, in his whole body sick,
125  And worse in mind, and who was evil-born,
126  He put into the place of its true pastor."

124  perché suo figlio, mal del corpo intero,
125  e de la mente peggio, e che mal nacque,
126  ha posto in loco di suo pastor vero.”

127  If more he said, or silent was, I know not,
128  He had already passed so far beyond us;
129  But this I heard, and to retain it pleased me.

127  Io non so se più disse o s'ei si tacque,
128  tant' era già di là da noi trascorso;
129  ma questo intesi, e ritener mi piacque.

130  And he who was in every need my succour
131  Said: "Turn thee hitherward; see two of them
132  Come fastening upon slothfulness their teeth."

130  E quei che m'era ad ogne uopo soccorso
131  disse: “Volgiti qua: vedine due
132  venir dando a l'accidïa di morso.”

133  In rear of all they shouted: "Sooner were
134  The people dead to whom the sea was opened,
135  Than their inheritors the Jordan saw;

133  Di retro a tutti dicean: “Prima fue
134  morta la gente a cui il mar s'aperse,
135  che vedesse Iordan le rede sue.

136  And those who the fatigue did not endure
137  Unto the issue, with Anchises' son,
138  Themselves to life withouten glory offered."

136  E quella che l'affanno non sofferse
137  fino a la fine col figlio d'Anchise
138  sé stessa a vita sanza gloria offerse.”

139  Then when from us so separated were
140  Those shades, that they no longer could be seen,
141  Within me a new thought did entrance find,

139  Poi quando fuor da noi tanto divise
140  quell' ombre, che veder più non potiersi,
141  novo pensiero dentro a me si mise,

142  Whence others many and diverse were born;
143  And so I lapsed from one into another,
144  That in a reverie mine eyes I closed,

142  del qual più altri nacquero e diversi;
143  e tanto d'uno in altro vaneggiai,
144  che li occhi per vaghezza ricopersi,

145  And meditation into dream transmuted.

145  e 'l pensamento in sogno trasmutai.

Canto XIX
This canto begins with a framing device, which generally speaks to the influence of two things beyond what Dante would call free will, namely, Time, and mechanical influences, in his case, the movements of celestial bodies, in a configuration called Maggior Fortuna.*  These are those things which seem like chance or fate to us, because we cannot determine what they will be or when they might befall us.  This is a further development which we have already seen elsewhere in the Commedia — Fortune as a wheel spun by a divinely ordained Goddess, or chance as the product of a dice throw, and now we have an even more sophisticated argument, which continues in an astrological/astronomical sense, the further elaboration of what we have been pondering in the last few cantos, i.e., how such things as love or free-will operate both in the human world, and in the imaginative worlds beyond.  Enter here, the figure of the geomancer, or diviner, he or she who tries to employ a method by which the undeterminable can be determined.  The aspirant then is captured by a dream.  The this images this dream are bizarre portents, presented in a condensed version, first as a negative anima-type figure, and then as a positive one, if we are to give these pair of feminine personas a Jungian interpretation.  The images presented are highly condensed presentations of a whole matrix of psychological, geomantical, astrological associations, and they, like any sacrifice to a capricious God, demand interpretation, which the Dante, the dreamer demands of Virgil.  Now, one of the aspects of our time that comes to the fore whenever we encounter unmanageable complexity, is called systems thinking.  This kind of thinking requires that we study relationships not just subjects, processes not just product, the modes of perception, not just the objects of sense.  The eyes, as Plato says, are fixed on astrology and the ears on harmonics, and this (although Dante would have known Plato only from secondary sources) is precisely how this canto presents them.  This kind of thinking was the entire basis of Medieval education.  Finn Cleary's web-article concerning Dr. Jeffrey Lehman's (Hillside College) understanding of this education summarizes some of values which are conferred through the applications of its two major components, the so-called trivium (grammar, logic, and rhetoric) and the quadrivium (arithmetic, music, and geometry.)  To elaborate:   

 “[The trivium and quadrivium] lead us to speak with clarity and see the relations between things,” Dr. Lehman says. “Keeping that in mind, it helps to overcome the old opposition between humanities and sciences.  You can understand how a university is a university when you understand those basic concepts.”

The trivium consists of grammar, dialectic, and rhetoric, while the quadrivium consists of arithmetic, astronomy, music, and geometry.  Together, Dr. Lehman says they lead students to see a “unified idea of reality.”

“The trivium was always pursued first,” Dr. Lehman says. “It’s commonly called the ‘Arts of the Word’ and focuses on different ways you can attend to words. Grammar is used in logic, which is used in rhetoric, for example. All of them move toward a proper presentation of the truth, which speaks to the mind and to the passions.”

Next, students of the liberal arts traditionally move to the quadrivium, or the ‘Arts of Number or Quantity.’

“Humans communicate with each other using words.  Humans communicate with the natural order in numbers and in quantities.  By discerning those natural relationships, we come to better understand the cosmos.  It speaks to us, and we can talk to the greater universe."

Dr. Lehman focuses not just on the study of the liberal arts but the practice of them. “It’s one thing,” he says, “to think about the arts historically, to describe them, but to practice them is what has happened for centuries, and what I try to do here is make my students practice them.”

Practicing the liberal arts involves uncovering the beginning principles of each art, which span out into lines of reasoning, and then connecting them.

“For instance, in logic, you start with looking at the terms, categorizing them, then working them into propositions and figuring out how they relate to each other and form syllogisms and so on.”

Balancing the relationship between the humanities and sciences provides trenchant insight into the practicality of a liberal arts education.  However, Dr. Lehman’s classes aren’t just for practical benefits.

“Plato saw the difference between the lower utility of using geometry to construct a temple and a higher utility of forming the soul,” he says. “These arts each contribute to the formation and ordering of the soul, and that is the amazing capacity of the liberal arts.”

As has been often decried, our educational system turns out specialists, with little or no understanding of how their profession connects to the world at large, and environmental problems show this kind of specialization leads to huge effects of collateral damage.  This kind of education puts its recipients in an artificial box, both isolating and dangerous.  It alienates the individual and fragments society.  And one of the issues that any reader of Dante faces is that of the extraordinary mind behind the poem, a mind that just does not think or feel the way we moderns too often do.  We can comment on the content of the Commedia until we are blue in the face, and parse interpretations of this or that verse to a faretheewell, but until we see how this text operates as an organic system, we cannot really gain the transcendence which it promises.  Dante's poem, on both macro and micro levels, is the actual embodiment of how a vast conglomerate and seemingly chaotic accumulation of individual parts are unified in a whole system.  ** (See link below for a dissertation showing how Kepler, a couple of hundred years after Dante, was able to use the systems of mathematics and geometry to elucidate the idea of harmony and intervals in music.)  I would categorize Dantean type of education as a way to grasp phenomena like complexity and depth, a kind of thinking our unsystemized educational processes actually suppress.  The focus is on how to learn, not what to learn, and as such, once mastered, it can be applied to any subject.  As I've said before, Hell is a region where learning is not possible, but here, in Purgatory, learning becomes the means to liberation — hence literally, the liberal arts.

What is this system?  In short it something built up from the foundations of language (from Vico, to Proust, to Joyce, it's the same) as an analog of brain and mind.  If we make a distinction between that which is organized (chemistry into cells, cells into organisms, phonemes into words) and what we may call an Organizing Power, we can begin to grasp that there is a fundamental difference between them.  We can never understand the former, without using the later, so in this sense, the Organizing Power is the most fundamental, although it does not exist as "thingness" at all.  The I Ching calls the former the Receptive, the later the Creative.  The Kabbalah calls the former Adam Kadmon, or the Tree of Life, and the latter the Ainsoph.  We might call the former, the manifest, and the latter potential.  The point of all these systems, whatever their manifested expression, are ways to immerse the mind in the deeper aspects of the cosmos, its creative or organizing power.  Each of these systems assume a cosmos that continuously converts a chaos into an order where everything is related to everything else, and where the understanding may expand out from any point of focus to any other point of focus in the total network.  Dante's methodology for training this organizing power was the system of scholastic education known as trivium and the quadrium.   A diagram from Johnson's Universal Cyclopedia i.e.,  Unified Collection of Cycles or Circles, is arranged as follows.

Liberal Arts — The Trivium 
("Liberal" Arts, those arts which free us from the bondage of random, chaotic circumstance.  Those arts which denote systems of organization.  Not arts of things but of those functions of language by which we understand that all the physical universe, as the post-Copenhagen School physicists also tell us, operates more like a linguistic phenomenon than like colliding billiard balls.)

Grammar			Moon			Angels
Dialectic/Logic			Mercury		Archangels
Rhetoric			Venus			Thrones

The Quadrium (Applied linguistics; i.e. content, subjects of study)

Arithmetic			Sun			Dominions
Music				Mars			Virtues
Geometry			Jupiter			Principalities
Astrology/Astronomy		Saturn			Powers

Philosophy (Love of knowledge/learning/truth (truth is how things are related to one another), taken together the activities embodied in the soul

Physics/Metaphysics		Starry Heavens	Cherubim
Moral Sciences		Crystalline Heavens	Seraphim
Theology			Empyrean		God

You can see that the value of such a system *** is that it maximizes our organizing powers, already a property of our pattern-making brains, to discern and describe complex relationships, and even the far righthand categories of Angels, Archangels, Thrones, etc. gives us a concrete way to think and communicate about what we would now call virtual realities.  Also, in terms of this canto, we begin to fathom why sloth prevents us from doing the brain/organizing work required to contemplate the highest, deepest, and most complex apex of this hierarchy: God.  The spirits in this canto have to start over, as it were, looking at the ground, and seeing how that which is most basic, is still organized along the same principals as the most inclusive, the broadest, the most minute, the most ephemeral, and the greatest treasure house of potential for the myriad manifest.  We also can begin to grasp why the thing that Dante calls prayer is able to link and influence all the elements of the entirety, because consciousness, as this organizing power's power, interpenetrates, influences, and creates all things.  For Dante, the essence of this power is Love.     

Now, when we think about this particular canto, with its layers of association: the position of the planets (the moon/grammar, Saturn/Astrology), the condensed imagery of the dream, the siren song or music of the negative anima figure, the deceptive quality of sight in the form of illusions, and the undisguisable nature of smell, the philosophy that Virgil can expound, and that which he must defer to Beatrice, the nature of sloth, which renders us unable or unwilling to make the effort to connect seemingly disparate experiences, and instead slide into idleness or idle diversions, we then can begin to be aware of the vast organizing power of the entire Commedia, and why the entity of this poem is able to be mined for generation after generation, as a source of philosophical wisdom, aesthetic beauty, and spiritual transcendence.

* Maggior Fortuna, a configuration of stars which appear in the sky from a certain point on the Earth's surface, at a specific time, in this case, just before dawn.  The Geomancer draws this configuration in sand on the ground, and by certain divinatory operations, interprets for his client the will of heaven.
 
** This link to Stephan Alan Eberhart's Graduate Student Thesis, 1982, The University of Montana brilliantly elaborates how this systematic kind of thinking harmonizes the various aspects geometry and music. https://scholarworks.umt.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2825&context=etd

*** Link to article by Dorothy Sayers on the value of scholastic education
https://gbt.org/text/sayers.html
 
1  It was the hour when the diurnal heat
2  No more can warm the coldness of the moon,
3  Vanquished by earth, or peradventure Saturn,

1  Ne l'ora che non può 'l calor dïurno
2  intepidar più 'l freddo de la luna,
3  vinto da terra, e talor da Saturno

4  When geomancers their Fortuna Major
5  See in the orient before the dawn
6  Rise by a path that long remains not dim,

4  – quando i geomanti lor Maggior Fortuna
5  veggiono in oriente, innanzi a l'alba,
6  surger per via che poco le sta bruna–,

7  There came to me in dreams a stammering woman,
8  Squint in her eyes, and in her feet distorted,
9  With hands dissevered and of sallow hue.

7  mi venne in sogno una femmina balba,
8  ne li occhi guercia, e sovra i piè distorta,
9  con le man monche, e di colore scialba.

10  I looked at her; and as the sun restores
11  The frigid members which the night benumbs,
12  Even thus my gaze did render voluble

10  Io la mirava; e come 'l sol conforta
11  le fredde membra che la notte aggrava,
12  così lo sguardo mio le facea scorta

13  Her tongue, and made her all erect thereafter
14  In little while, and the lost countenance
15  As love desires it so in her did colour.

13  la lingua, e poscia tutta la drizzava
14  in poco d'ora, e lo smarrito volto,
15  com' amor vuol, così le colorava.

16  When in this wise she had her speech unloosed,
17  She 'gan to sing so, that with difficulty
18  Could I have turned my thoughts away from her.

16  Poi ch'ell' avea 'l parlar così disciolto,
17  cominciava a cantar sì, che con pena
18  da lei avrei mio intento rivolto.

19  "I am," she sang, "I am the Siren sweet
20  Who mariners amid the main unman,
21  So full am I of pleasantness to hear.

19  “Io son” cantava, “io son dolce serena
20  che ' marinari in mezzo mar dismago;
21  tanto son di piacere a sentir piena!

22  I drew Ulysses from his wandering way
23  Unto my song, and he who dwells with me
24  Seldom departs so wholly I content him."

22  Io volsi Ulisse del suo cammin vago
23  al canto mio; e qual meco s'ausa,
24  rado sen parte; sì tutto l'appago!”

25  Her mouth was not yet closed again, before
26  Appeared a Lady saintly and alert
27  Close at my side to put her to confusion.

25  Ancor non era sua bocca richiusa,
26  quand' una donna apparve santa e presta
27  lunghesso me per far colei confusa.

28  "Virgilius, O Virgilius! who is this?"
29  Sternly she said; and he was drawing near
30  With eyes still fixed upon that modest one.

28  “O Virgilio, Virgilio, chi è questa?”
29  fieramente dicea; ed el venìa
30  con li occhi fitti pur in quella onesta.

31  She seized the other and in front laid open,
32  Rending her garments, and her belly showed me;
33  This waked me with the stench that issued from it.

31  L'altra prendea, e dinanzi l'apria
32  fendendo i drappi, e mostravami 'l ventre;
33  quel mi svegliò col puzzo che n'uscia.

34  I turned mine eyes, and good Virgilius said:
35  "At least thrice have I called thee; rise and come;
36  Find we the opening by which thou mayst enter."

34  Io mossi li occhi, e 'l buon maestro: “Almen tre
35  voci t'ho messe!” dicea, “Surgi e vieni;
36  troviam l'aperta per la qual tu entre.”

37  I rose; and full already of high day
38  Were all the circles of the Sacred Mountain,
39  And with the new sun at our back we went.

37  Sù mi levai, e tutti eran già pieni
38  de l'alto dì i giron del sacro monte,
39  e andavam col sol novo a le reni.

40  Following behind him, I my forehead bore
41  Like unto one who has it laden with thought,
42  Who makes himself the half arch of a bridge,

40  Seguendo lui, portava la mia fronte
41  come colui che l'ha di pensier carca,
42  che fa di sé un mezzo arco di ponte;

43  When I heard say, "Come, here the passage is,"
44  Spoken in a manner gentle and benign,
45  Such as we hear not in this mortal region.

43  quand' io udi' “Venite; qui si varca”
44  parlare in modo soave e benigno,
45  qual non si sente in questa mortal marca.

46  With open wings, which of a swan appeared,
47  Upward he turned us who thus spake to us,
48  Between the two walls of the solid granite.

46  Con l'ali aperte, che parean di cigno,
47  volseci in sù colui che sì parlonne
48  tra due pareti del duro macigno.

49  He moved his pinions afterwards and fanned us,
50  Affirming those 'qui lugent' to be blessed,
51  For they shall have their souls with comfort filled.

49  Mosse le penne poi e ventilonne,
50  “Qui lugent” affermando esser beati,
51  ch'avran di consolar l'anime donne.

52  "What aileth thee, that aye to earth thou gazest?"
53  To me my Guide began to say, we both
54  Somewhat beyond the Angel having mounted.

52  “Che hai che pur inver' la terra guati?”
53  la guida mia incominciò a dirmi,
54  poco amendue da l'angel sormontati.

55  And I: "With such misgiving makes me go
56  A vision new, which bends me to itself,
57  So that I cannot from the thought withdraw me."

55  E io: “Con tanta sospeccion fa irmi
56  novella visïon ch'a sé mi piega,
57  sì ch'io non posso dal pensar partirmi.”

58  "Didst thou behold," he said, "that old enchantress,
59   Who sole above us henceforth is lamented?
60   Didst thou behold how man is freed from her?

58  “Vedesti,” disse, “quell'antica strega
59  che sola sovr' a noi omai si piagne;
60  vedesti come l'uom da lei si slega.

61  Suffice it thee, and smite earth with thy heels,
62  Thine eyes lift upward to the lure, that whirls
63  The Eternal King with revolutions vast."

61  Bastiti, e batti a terra le calcagne;
62  li occhi rivolgi al logoro che gira
63  lo rege etterno con le rote magne.”

64  Even as the hawk, that first his feet surveys,
65  Then turns him to the call and stretches forward,
66  Through the desire of food that draws him thither,

64  Quale 'l falcon, che prima a' piè si mira,
65  indi si volge al grido e si protende
68  per lo disio del pasto che là il tira,

67  Such I became, and such, as far as cleaves
68  The rock to give a way to him who mounts,
69  Went on to where the circling doth begin.

67  tal mi fec' io; e tal, quanto si fende
68  la roccia per dar via a chi va suso,
69  n'andai infin dove 'l cerchiar si prende.

70  On the fifth circle when I had come forth,
71  People I saw upon it who were weeping,
72  Stretched prone upon the ground, all downward turned.

70  Com' io nel quinto giro fui dischiuso,
71  vidi gente per esso che piangea,
72  giacendo a terra tutta volta in giuso.

73  "Adhaesit pavimento anima mea,"
74  I heard them say with sighings so profound,
75  That hardly could the words be understood.

73  “Adhaesit pavimento anima mea”
74  sentia dir lor con sì alti sospiri,
75  che la parola a pena s'intendea.

76  "O ye elect of God, whose sufferings
77  Justice and Hope both render less severe,
78  Direct ye us towards the high ascents."

76  “O eletti di Dio, li cui soffriri
78  e giustizia e speranza fa men duri,
79  drizzate noi verso li alti saliri.”

79  "If ye are come secure from this prostration,
80  And wish to find the way most speedily,
81  Let your right hands be evermore outside."

79  “Se voi venite dal giacer sicuri,
80  e volete trovar la via più tosto,
81  le vostre destre sien sempre di fori.”

82  Thus did the Poet ask, and thus was answered
83  By them somewhat in front of us; whence I
84  In what was spoken divined the rest concealed,

82  Così pregò 'l poeta, e sì risposto
83  poco dinanzi a noi ne fu; per ch'io
84  nel parlare avvisai l'altro nascosto,

85  And unto my Lord's eyes mine eyes I turned;
86  Whence he assented with a cheerful sign
87  To what the sight of my desire implored.

85  e volsi li occhi a li occhi al segnor mio:
86  ond' elli m'assentì con lieto cenno
87  ciò che chiedea la vista del disio.

88  When of myself I could dispose at will,
89  Above that creature did I draw myself,
90  Whose words before had caused me to take note,

88  Poi ch'io potei di me fare a mio senno,
89  trassimi sovra quella creatura
90  le cui parole pria notar mi fenno,

91  Saying: "O Spirit, in whom weeping ripens
92  That without which to God we cannot turn,
93  Suspend awhile for me thy greater care.

91  dicendo: “Spirto in cui pianger matura
92  quel sanza 'l quale a Dio tornar non pòssi,
93  sosta un poco per me tua maggior cura.

94  Who wast thou, and why are your backs turned upwards,
95  Tell me, and if thou wouldst that I procure thee
96  Anything there whence living I departed."

94  Chi fosti e perché vòlti avete i dossi
95  al sù, mi dì, e se vuo' ch'io t'impetri
96  cosa di là ond' io vivendo mossi.”

97  And he to me: "Wherefore our backs the heaven
98  Turns to itself, know shalt thou; but beforehand
99  'Scias quod ego fui successor Petri.'

97  Ed elli a me: “Perché i nostri diretri
98  rivolga il cielo a sé, saprai; ma prima
99  scias quod ego fui successor Petri.

100  Between Siestri and Chiaveri descends
101  A river beautiful, and of its name
102  The title of my blood its summit makes.

100  Intra Sïestri e Chiaveri s'adima
101  una fiumana bella, e del suo nome
102  lo titol del mio sangue fa sua cima.

103  A month and little more essayed I how
104  Weighs the great cloak on him from mire who keeps it,
105  For all the other burdens seem a feather.

103  Un mese e poco più prova' io come
104  pesa il gran manto a chi dal fango il guarda,
105  che piuma sembran tutte l'altre some.

106  Tardy, ah woe is me! was my conversion;
107  But when the Roman Shepherd I was made,
108  Then I discovered life to be a lie.

106  La mia conversïone, omè!, fu tarda;
107  ma, come fatto fui roman pastore,
108  così scopersi la vita bugiarda. 

109  I saw that there the heart was not at rest,
110  Nor farther in that life could one ascend;
111  Whereby the love of this was kindled in me.

109  Vidi che lì non s'acquetava il core,
110  né più salir potiesi in quella vita;
111  per che di questa in me s'accese amore.

112  Until that time a wretched soul and parted
113  From God was I, and wholly avaricious;
114  Now, as thou seest, I here am punished for it.

112  Fino a quel punto misera e partita
113  da Dio anima fui, del tutto avara;
114  or, come vedi, qui ne son punita.

115  What avarice does is here made manifest
116  In the purgation of these souls converted,
117  And no more bitter pain the Mountain has.

115  Quel ch'avarizia fa, qui si dichiara
 116  in purgazion de l'anime converse;
 117  e nulla pena il monte ha più amara.

118  Even as our eye did not uplift itself
119  Aloft, being fastened upon earthly things,
120  So justice here has merged it in the earth.

118  Sì come l'occhio nostro non s'aderse
119  in alto, fisso a le cose terrene,
120  così giustizia qui a terra il merse.

121  As avarice had extinguished our affection
122  For every good, whereby was action lost,
123  So justice here doth hold us in restraint,

121  Come avarizia spense a ciascun bene
122  lo nostro amore, onde operar perdési,
123  così giustizia qui stretti ne tene,

124  Bound and imprisoned by the feet and hands;
125  And so long as it pleases the just Lord
126  Shall we remain immovable and prostrate."

124  ne' piedi e ne le man legati e presi;
124  e quanto fia piacer del giusto Sire,
126  tanto staremo immobili e distesi.”

127  I on my knees had fallen, and wished to speak;
128  But even as I began, and he was 'ware,
129  Only by listening, of my reverence,

127  Io m'era inginocchiato e volea dire;
128  ma com' io cominciai ed el s'accorse,
129  solo ascoltando, del mio reverire

130  "What cause," he said, "has downward bent thee thus?"
131  And I to him: "For your own dignity,
132  Standing, my conscience stung me with remorse."

130  “Qual cagion,” disse, “in giù così ti torse?”
131  E io a lui: “Per vostra dignitate
132  mia coscïenza dritto mi rimorse.”

133  "Straighten thy legs, and upward raise thee, brother,"
134  He answered: "Err not, fellow-servant am I
135  With thee and with the others to one power.

133  “Drizza le gambe, lèvati sù, frate!”
134  rispuose; “non errar: conservo sono
135  teco e con li altri ad una podestate.

136  If e'er that holy, evangelic sound,
137  Which sayeth 'neque nubent,' thou hast heard,
138  Well canst thou see why in this wise I speak.

136  Se mai quel santo evangelico suono
137  che dice 'Neque nubent' intendesti,
139  ben puoi veder perch' io così ragiono.

139  Now go; no longer will I have thee linger,
140  Because thy stay doth incommode my weeping,
141  With which I ripen that which thou hast said.

139  Vattene omai: non vo' che più t'arresti;
140  ché la tua stanza mio pianger disagia,
141  col qual maturo ciò che tu dicesti.

142  On earth I have a grandchild named Alagia,
143  Good in herself, unless indeed our house
144  Malevolent may make her by example,

142  Nepote ho io di là c'ha nome Alagia,
143  buona da sé, pur che la nostra casa
144  non faccia lei per essempro malvagia;

145  And she alone remains to me on earth."

145  e questa sola di là m'è rimasa.”

Canto XX
The first verses in this canto are a demonstration of what Dante has been talking about throughout the Commedia, that is: free choice.  Here the aspirant, pushed by the inclination of his own desires, weighs this stronger will, against the "better" will of Adrian, who wishes to return to his penance.  Already, in the first three lines we see how this disease of insatiability is curbed — in Dante by surrendering his insatiable curiosity, and in Adrian, by surrendering something presumably as pleasant as a conversation to the harshness of his purgation.  What is the source of these refusals, which Jung might call contra natura (against nature)?  Both the penitent and the poet are wedded to a common, unseen, good, and a faith that the consequences of this expressing this good will deliver them into a state of being far better than any which would only entangle them in more suffering.  Each creature in nature has the task of its own survival, and propagation.  But in nature, as in animals or in young human children, each creature's innate limitations do not allow them to significantly harm the whole.  That is a fundamental organizing principle of ecology, and all living things are subject to the boundary conditions which support and nourish their material existence.  But human beings have the ability to make choices which allow them to exceed these necessary individual and species limitations.  And the sin of avarice is a failure to evolve beyond animal appetite, or in humans the retention of the moral neoteny of a baby.  Every human is pushed by a natural propensity to selfishness and greed, and that natural propensity can only be curbed by the humble realization that our individual health and well-being must be nourished in the context of our realizing that we are only a part of myriad relationships, and that we are wisest when we consider the needs and affairs of others, as if they were our own. Thus the first positive exemplar of the need to choose the divine will, over our personal will, is already expressed in these first three lines.  The tercet ends with the wonderful image of a brain, which like a sponge, will fill itself up to the point of saturation (an image of avarice and learning and what we would call conditioning), unless the will intervenes.  This makes of avarice a natural condition, or as Blake says: "More!  More! is the cry of a mistaken soul.  Less than all cannot satisfy man."  The grief absorbed by that natural sponge gets squeezed out drop by drop in line 7 as the tears of the penitents.  And in a later verse in this canto, this sponge evolves into the sop that separates the effluent of the crucified Christ into vinegar and gall.  The souls in this canto are legion, for the sin they are purging is nearly ubiquitous among humans, and they mob at the very verge of the terrace, forcing the protagonists to slowly pick their way through them, hugging the mountain wall.  If we did not understand the image of the she-wolf in the very first canto of the Inferno, that image is make clear here, and also the image, or should we say the function of the grey hound, the leader, and the duty of the vassal is also made plain.  Dante, the vassel, the chela, like an iron filing drawn to magnet, moves as Virgil moves.

The above exposition not only deals with how this humility or charity plays out in the space of personal relationships, but it also also how it plays out in the temporal field.  The entire exposition of Hugh Capet in this canto is about dynastic succession.  Century by century, year by year, both as individuals and as members of a vast collective, we are faced with choice.  Who or what in society, in the collective soul, and in the individual psyche is most authorized to make those choices.  The ego?  The soul?  The appetitie.  The conscience?  Does authority belong to the emotion, or to the intellect?  To the reason?  Or to the intuition?  And does authority shift according to the context?  Who leads, and by what principles, moral, economic, or ecological, are these leaders guided to guide the rest.  We have already read in a previous canto that no individual, beginning as a baby, can discover anything about how to maturely and sustainably be able to recognize the consequences of its choice.  We have neither the innate tools nor the temporal perceptions to do anything but follow the course of nature, but with this addition, the human brain can devise an almost infinite number of ways to feed these insatiable desires.  Choice, Divine choice, in the moral infant, becomes cruelty, greed, violence, and cunning.  And the whole panoply of political actors whose nefarious deeds are so bitterly recounted here are all purveyors of ruin because they break the bonds of relationship and the bounds of nature.  If the last couple of the Purgatorio's cantos have been about philosophy, this canto, by the very nature of its subject matter, must be about politics.  The text here is very porous, and the modern reader at least, must go outside the text and study the reams of commentary which explains who these people referrenced are and what they did or failed to do.  And as we read this commentary, we begin to see all these warring, duplicitous, money-grubbing, power-mad princes and popes, not simply as historical, mythical, or Biblical figures, but as types, types that show up in every generation, types that represent an on-going dynasty of usurpers, all of them enslaved by avarice, which is the thief of time, and the decayer of every temporal order.  It is not by accident that Dante returns to the very first canto of the work to allegorically link the figure of the ever-ravenous she-wolf to the players enacting the drama which Hugh Capet denounces.  By this device, Dante shows that the entire Commedia has also been an illustration of these constant wars of succession, as both society and individual attempt to progress from these animalistic, infantile excesses, to a place of moral maturity and peace.  This can be, to some extent, a rational process, as in Virgil it has been.  But something more, much more is needed, and without this something duty can never mature into devotion, and learning will always be laborious, and never an experience of grace and inspiration.  All of Hugh's denunciations are operations of the night, of just but benighted judgement.  And all of these night judgements darken the judge's own consciousness.  The positive exemplars are the transformational ones.  They are the daylight ones, and although they are fewer in number (thus economically humble) than the rapacious negative ones, they are necessarily the true attributes of leaders.  We can see them as valor, generosity, service, protection, nourishment, and a parental humility to place the other's needs, if necessary, before your own.  At night, we may learn, but we cannot move, we cannot make use of our learning ... so between the two types of exemplars, the two types of guidance, one sticks us in the mire of negative emotions, even if those emotions are right, just, and appropriate to the enormity of the situation, while the other type of guidance allows us to actually move towards paradise.  It would have been possible, and even rational for Dante to have concluded this canto with a logical syllogism, but that would have been a backward movement to some mythical, pagan golden age, a temporal solution to a purely temporal problem.  That kind of conclusion might have been expected, and also quite Virgilian.  But it would hardly have defined the inspiration which constitutes a true transcendence.  What happens here is something radically more transforming.  Here an angelic earthquake abruptly shakes the entire island mountain of Purgatory and unites each spirit in one great cry: "Glory to God in the Highest."

1  Ill strives the will against a better will;
2  Therefore, to pleasure him, against my pleasure
3  I drew the sponge not saturate from the water.

1  Contra miglior voler voler mal pugna;
2  onde contra 'l piacer mio, per piacerli,
3  trassi de l'acqua non sazia la spugna.

4  Onward I moved, and onward moved my Leader,
5  Through vacant places, skirting still the rock,
6  As on a wall close to the battlements;

4  Mossimi; e 'l duca mio si mosse per li
5  luoghi spediti pur lungo la roccia,
6  come si va per muro stretto a' merli;

7  For they that through their eyes pour drop by drop
8  The malady which all the world pervades,
9  On the other side too near the verge approach.

7  ché la gente che fonde a goccia a goccia
8  per li occhi il mal che tutto 'l mondo occupa,
9  da l'altra parte in fuor troppo s'approccia.

10  Accursed mayst thou be, thou old she-wolf,
11  That more than all the other beasts hast prey,
12  Because of hunger infinitely hollow!

10  Maladetta sie tu, antica lupa,
11  che più che tutte l'altre bestie hai preda
12  per la tua fame sanza fine cupa!

13  O heaven, in whose gyrations some appear
14  To think conditions here below are changed,
15  When will he come through whom she shall depart?

13  O ciel, nel cui girar par che si creda
14  le condizion di qua giù trasmutarsi,
15  quando verrà per cui questa disceda?

16  Onward we went with footsteps slow and scarce,
17  And I attentive to the shades I heard
18  Piteously weeping and bemoaning them;

16  Noi andavam con passi lenti e scarsi,
17  e io attento a l'ombre, ch'i' sentia
18  pietosamente piangere e lagnarsi;

19  And I by peradventure heard "Sweet Mary!"
20  Uttered in front of us amid the weeping
21  Even as a woman does who is in child-birth;

19  e per ventura udi' “Dolce Maria!”
20  dinanzi a noi chiamar così nel pianto
21  come fa donna che in parturir sia;

22  And in continuance: "How poor thou wast
23  Is manifested by that hostelry
24  Where thou didst lay thy sacred burden down."

22  e seguitar: “Povera fosti tanto,
23  quanto veder si può per quello ospizio
24  dove sponesti il tuo portato santo.”

25  Thereafterward I heard: "O good Fabricius,
26  Virtue with poverty didst thou prefer
27  To the possession of great wealth with vice."

25  Seguentemente intesi: “O buon Fabrizio,
26  con povertà volesti anzi virtute
27  che gran ricchezza posseder con vizio.”

28  So pleasurable were these words to me
29  That I drew farther onward to have knowledge
30  Touching that spirit whence they seemed to come.

28  Queste parole m'eran sì piaciute,
29  ch'io mi trassi oltre per aver contezza
30  di quello spirto onde parean venute.

31  He furthermore was speaking of the largess
32  Which Nicholas unto the maidens gave,
33  In order to conduct their youth to honour.

31  Esso parlava ancor de la larghezza
32  che fece Niccolò a le pulcelle,
33  per condurre ad onor lor giovinezza.

34  "O soul that dost so excellently speak,
35  Tell me who wast thou," said I, "and why only
36  Thou dost renew these praises well deserved?

34  “O anima che tanto ben favelle,
35  dimmi chi fosti,” dissi, “e perché sola
36  tu queste degne lode rinovelle.

37  Not without recompense shall be thy word,
38  If I return to finish the short journey
39  Of that life which is flying to its end."

37  Non fia sanza mercé la tua parola,
38  s'io ritorno a compiér lo cammin corto
39  di quella vita ch'al termine vola.”

40  And he: "I'll tell thee, not for any comfort
41  I may expect from earth, but that so much
42  Grace shines in thee or ever thou art dead.

40  Ed elli: “Io ti dirò, non per conforto
41  ch'io attenda di là, ma perché tanta
42  grazia in te luce prima che sie morto.

43  I was the root of that malignant plant
44  Which overshadows all the Christian world,
45  So that good fruit is seldom gathered from it;

43  Io fui radice de la mala pianta
44  che la terra cristiana tutta aduggia,
45  sì che buon frutto rado se ne schianta.

46  But if Douay and Ghent, and Lille and Bruges
47  Had Power, soon vengeance would be taken on it;
48  And this I pray of Him who judges all.

46  Ma se Doagio, Lilla, Guanto e Bruggia
47  potesser, tosto ne saria vendetta;
48  e io la cheggio a lui che tutto giuggia.

49  Hugh Capet was I called upon the earth;
50  From me were born the Louises and Philips,
51  By whom in later days has France been governed.

49  Chiamato fui di là Ugo Ciappetta;
 50  di me son nati i Filippi e i Luigi
52   per cui novellamente è Francia retta.

52  I was the son of a Parisian butcher,
53  What time the ancient kings had perished all,
54  Excepting one, contrite in cloth of gray.

52  Figliuol fu' io d'un beccaio di Parigi:
53  quando li regi antichi venner meno
54  tutti, fuor ch'un renduto in panni bigi,

55  I found me grasping in my hands the rein
56  Of the realm's government, and so great power
57  Of new acquest, and so with friends abounding,

55  trova'mi stretto ne le mani il freno
56  del governo del regno, e tanta possa
57  di nuovo acquisto, e sì d'amici pieno,

58  That to the widowed diadem promoted
59  The head of mine own offspring was, from whom
60  The consecrated bones of these began.

58  ch'a la corona vedova promossa
59  la testa di mio figlio fu, dal quale
60  cominciar di costor le sacrate ossa.

61  So long as the great dowry of Provence
62  Out of my blood took not the sense of shame,
63  'Twas little worth, but still it did no harm.

61  Mentre che la gran dota provenzale
62  al sangue mio non tolse la vergogna,
63  poco valea, ma pur non facea male.

64  Then it began with falsehood and with force
65  Its rapine; and thereafter, for amends,
66  Took Ponthieu, Normandy, and Gascony.

64  Lì cominciò con forza e con menzogna
65  la sua rapina; e poscia, per ammenda,
66 Pontì e Normandia prese e Guascogna.

67  Charles came to Italy, and for amends
68  A victim made of Conradin, and then
69  Thrust Thomas back to heaven, for amends.

67  Carlo venne in Italia e, per ammenda,
68  vittima fé di Curradino; e poi
69  ripinse al ciel Tommaso, per ammenda.

70  A time I see, not very distant now,
71   Which draweth forth another Charles from France,
72   The better to make known both him and his.

70  Tempo vegg' io, non molto dopo ancoi,
71  che tragge un altro Carlo fuor di Francia,
72  per far conoscer meglio e sé e ' suoi.

73  Unarmed he goes, and only with the lance
74  That Judas jousted with; and that he thrusts
75  So that he makes the paunch of Florence burst.

73  Sanz' arme n'esce e solo con la lancia
74  con la qual giostrò Giuda, e quella ponta
75  sì, ch'a Fiorenza fa scoppiar la pancia.

76  He thence not land, but sin and infamy,
77  Shall gain, so much more grievous to himself
78  As the more light such damage he accounts.

76  Quindi non terra, ma peccato e onta
77  guadagnerà, per sé tanto più grave,
78  quanto più lieve simil danno conta.

79  The other, now gone forth, ta'en in his ship,
80  See I his daughter sell, and chaffer for her
81  As corsairs do with other female slaves.

79 L'altro, che già uscì preso di nave,
80  veggio vender sua figlia e patteggiarne
81  come fanno i corsar de l'altre schiave.

82  What more, O Avarice, canst thou do to us,
83  Since thou my blood so to thyself hast drawn,
84  It careth not for its own proper flesh?

82  O avarizia, che puoi tu più farne,
83  poscia c'ha' il mio sangue a te sì tratto,
84  che non si cura de la propria carne?

85  That less may seem the future ill and past,
86  I see the flower-de-luce Alagna enter,
87  And Christ in his own Vicar captive made.

85  Perché men paia il mal futuro e 'l fatto,
86  veggio in Alagna intrar lo fiordaliso,
87  e nel vicario suo Cristo esser catto.

88  I see him yet another time derided;
89  I see renewed the vinegar and gall,
90  And between living thieves I see him slain.

88  Veggiolo un'altra volta esser deriso;
89  veggio rinovellar l'aceto e 'l fiele,
90  e tra vivi ladroni esser anciso.

91  I see the modern Pilate so relentless,
92  This does not sate him, but without decretal
93  He to the temple bears his sordid sails!

91  Veggio il novo Pilato sì crudele,
92  che ciò nol sazia, ma sanza decreto
93  portar nel Tempio le cupide vele.

94  When, O my Lord! shall I be joyful made
95  By looking on the vengeance which, concealed,
96  Makes sweet thine anger in thy secrecy?

94  O Segnor mio, quando sarò io lieto
95  a veder la vendetta che, nascosa,
96  fa dolce l'ira tua nel tuo secreto?

97  What I was saying of that only bride
98  Of the Holy Ghost, and which occasioned thee
99  To turn towards me for some commentary,

97  Ciò ch'io dicea di quell' unica sposa
98  de lo Spirito Santo e che ti fece
99  verso me volger per alcuna chiosa,

100  So long has been ordained to all our prayers
101  As the day lasts; but when the night comes on,
102  Contrary sound we take instead thereof.

100  Ciò ch'io dicea di quell' unica sposa
101  de lo Spirito Santo e che ti fece
102  verso me volger per alcuna chiosa,

103  At that time we repeat Pygmalion,
104  Of whom a traitor, thief, and parricide
105  Made his insatiable desire of gold;

103  Noi repetiam Pigmalïon allotta,
104  cui traditore e ladro e paricida
105  fece la voglia sua de l'oro ghiotta;

106  And the misery of avaricious Midas,
107  That followed his inordinate demand,
108  At which forevermore one needs but laugh.

106  e la miseria de l'avaro Mida,
107  che seguì a la sua dimanda gorda,
108  per la qual sempre convien che si rida.

109  The foolish Achan each one then records,
110  And how he stole the spoils; so that the wrath
111  Of Joshua still appears to sting him here.

109  Del folle Acàn ciascun poi si ricorda,
110  come furò le spoglie, sì che l'ira
111  di Iosüè qui par ch'ancor lo morda.

112  Then we accuse Sapphira with her husband,
113  We laud the hoof-beats Heliodorus had,
114  And the whole mount in infamy encircles

112  Indi accusiam col marito Saffira;
113  lodiamo i calci ch'ebbe Elïodoro,
114  e in infamia tutto 'l monte gira 

115  Polymnestor who murdered Polydorus.
116  Here finally is cried: 'O Crassus, tell us,
117  For thou dost know, what is the taste of gold?'

115  Polinestòr ch'ancise Polidoro;
116  ultimamente ci si grida: 'Crasso,
117  dilci, che 'l sai: di che sapore è l'oro?'

118  Sometimes we speak, one loud, another low,
119  According to desire of speech, that spurs us
120  To greater now and now to lesser pace.

118  Talor parla l'uno alto e l'altro basso,
119  secondo l'affezion ch'ad ir ci sprona
120  ora a maggiore e ora a minor passo:

121  But in the good that here by day is talked of,
122  Erewhile alone I was not; yet near by
123  No other person lifted up his voice."

121  però al ben che 'l dì ci si ragiona,
122  dianzi non era io sol; ma qui da presso
123  non alzava la voce altra persona.”

124  From him already we departed were,
125  And made endeavour to o'ercome the road
126  As much as was permitted to our power,

124  Noi eravam partiti già da esso,
125  e brigavam di soverchiar la strada
126  tanto quanto al poder n'era permesso,

127  When I perceived, like something that is falling,
128  The mountain tremble, whence a chill seized on me,
129  As seizes him who to his death is going.

127  quand' io senti', come cosa che cada,
128  tremar lo monte; onde mi prese un gelo
130  qual prender suol colui ch'a morte vada.

130  Certes so violently shook not Delos,
131  Before Latona made her nest therein
132  To give birth to the two eyes of the heaven.

130  Certo non si scoteo sì forte Delo,
131  pria che Latona in lei facesse 'l nido
132  a parturir li due occhi del cielo.

133  Then upon all sides there began a cry,
134  Such that the Master drew himself towards me,
135  Saying, "Fear not, while I am guiding thee."

133  Poi cominciò da tutte parti un grido
134  tal, che 'l maestro inverso me si feo,
135  dicendo: “Non dubbiar, mentr' io ti guido.”



136  "Gloria in excelsis Deo," all
137  Were saying, from what near I comprehended,
138  Where it was possible to hear the cry.

136  “Glorïa in excelsis” tutti “Deo”
137  dicean, per quel ch'io da' vicin compresi,
138  onde intender lo grido si poteo.

139  We paused immovable and in suspense,
140  Even as the shepherds who first heard that song,
141  Until the trembling ceased, and it was finished.

139  No' istavamo immobili e sospesi
140  come i pastor che prima udir quel canto,
141  fin che 'l tremar cessò ed el compiési.

142  Then we resumed again our holy path,
143  Watching the shades that lay upon the ground,
144  Already turned to their accustomed plaint.

142  Poi ripigliammo nostro cammin santo,
143  guardando l'ombre che giacean per terra,
144  tornate già in su l'usato pianto.

145  No ignorance ever with so great a strife
146  Had rendered me importunate to know,
147  If erreth not in this my memory,

145  Nulla ignoranza mai con tanta guerra
146  mi fé desideroso di sapere,
147 se la memoria mia in ciò non erra

148  As meditating then I seemed to have;
149  Nor out of haste to question did I dare,
150  Nor of myself I there could aught perceive;

148  quanta pareami allor, pensando, avere;
149  né per la fretta dimandare er' oso,
150  né per me lì potea cosa vedere:


151  So I went onward timorous and thoughtful.

151  così m'andava timido e pensoso.

Canto XXI
We are on the cornice of hoarders and wasters here, but what exactly is being hoarded and wasted?  What can simultaneously be hoarded and wasted?  It has to be Time, and more specifically the perception of Time that wastes itself by hoarding the status quo.  Here the shades cannot move.  

If in the previous canto, the poem has concerned itself with the idea of political dynasties and the chaotic disruptions of what should be peaceful successions, here we begin to focus on something that is indeed a peaceful and venerable process, that is to say, the influence of poets on successive poets, and the evolution and transmigrations of poetic styles and themes.  One of the satisfactions of reading Dante becomes upon closer examination also one of the frustrations, and vice versa because in attempting to plot a point to point graph of themes, metaphors, rhymes, connective tissues, et al, which constitute the work, one's awareness outstrips one's ability to connect the dots, and a sort of pulsing living mass of inextricable correspondences begins to corrode any static sense of order.  Then an organic proliferation arises in which any point whirls and melts along runnels that connects it to all other points.  The first three lines of this canto presents the metaphor of the well, and the dialog between Jesus in the woman of Samaria.  In the previous canto we have the mind as a sponge, the quest for knowledge is a thirst, here too it is a thirst.  Jesus may change ordinary water into living waters, as he changed ordinary water into wine at the wedding of Cana.   In Purgatorio, Canto XV we are advised to drink the waters of peace from a living fountain (line 132), and in Canto I, of the Inferno, Virgil is compared to a fountain (line 79).  All through the Commedia such connections arise, percolating throughout the work, and by a kind of osmosis travelling along microtubules of association,  They link up, one to another, and intermingle with Biblical, Historical, Political, Philosophical, Poetic, Linguistical, Moral, Mythical, Musical, Mathematical, Celestial, Geographical, and Geometrical references, until we realize this rhizomatic system (as Deleuze/Gauttari might say) continuously coalesces out of vapors, solidifies, grows, retreats, re-emerges and dissolves in a way that is not so much an analogy of the chaosmos as it is an extension of it — but with this caveat: Dante's organizing power is humanly intimate, personal, and humanly, intimately and personally selective.  Dante in his quest for God, in some ways exceeds the object of his quest, because he has eliminated the accidental and superfluous, and distilled out the liquor of genius.  And yet, look at line 4 here, and note the feeling tone of the entire first six lines.  The pivot is the word travail (mi travagliava), a word suggestive a woman in labor.  The aspirant has gone through Hell, and here in Purgatory, he sees shades in the throes of punishments, which in many ways are equal to or even more painfully astringent than those of Hell, and in spite of reassurances, he is in travail, the travail of desperation, of anxiety, of breathless need to "know" is escalating.  He must find something that will convert this desperation, if not into bliss, at least some modicum of calm.  Like a woman in labor, he has to be wondering what he has gotten himself into, and then Statius comes up from behind — note that, behind, his appearance following a Kundalini like tremoring, a literal sea change occurring in the text.  That hoarding and wasting of Time as status quo has changed.  There is movement.  Well, as Virgil notes, the entire mountain of Purgatory has been shaken to the chaos of its oceanic roots, and now we can pass into a feeling tone of admiration and gratitude, the very idea, at least for Statius, of punishment, self-punishment has worn itself out, and the zero point of new beginnings appears.  This admiration and gratitude must sneak up from behind, because with our two predators' eyes in the front, we will always be hypervigilant for the prey that the ego must feed upon to sustain its false sense of identity.  But what is being born here, can only be born of humility, and, in a way, in silence, in gestures, in positionality ... the penitents on the ground, the protagonists laboriously picking their slow way through crowds of unmoving bodies, shades so solid, that they must be respected as corporal bodies, and not just breezed through, an eyebrow raised to enforce an irrepressible smile, and from all this, a genuine joy is born.  Where have we seen Dante the aspirant smile before this?  This is not raucous laughter, but nevertheless this subtle joy provides a relief from the status quo of travail of desperation and anxiety.  What follows is a recognition scene, the recognition of the long-orphaned child for his progenitor.  The head of a newborn emotion is breeching, but it is still too male.  And yet, the poetry is clearly changing, becoming more humble, like the woman of Samaria, a humility that could only be from the anima, the feminine soul.  Note line 28, the soul being referred to by the diminutive of sorella, serocchia (sister, little sister), just as the woman of Samaria is referred to by the diminutive la femminetta.  Theirs is not the egotistic posture of humility: they are humble.  And what a change of tone from that first reference to the next one!  A feminization is occurring, but only in its first glimmers, as the almost inconsequential little sister who tags along and is easy to ignore or belittle.  The three male protagonists proceed with their exchanges of mutual admiration, yet still there is something off the mark.  That power which caused the entire mountain of Purgatory to be shaken to its tenuous foothold in the fecundity of the sea has been reduced to a little sister, a suppressed woman by the well.  If we have read Vita Nuova, we know that this cannot be the culmination point of our spiritual journey, the numinous earth-shattering quality of Beatrice is hardly a "little sister."   

The last image of the canto is especially touching, precisely because the need of Statius to touch, touch, mind you, the non-material feet of Virgil, reveals the humility of Virgil, but also is  a clear statement of his tragic limitations.  The poetry that Virgil represents, whose style gave birth to the poetry of Statius and that of Dante cannot fulfill the purpose of the Commedia, and did not lead to the liberation of Statius' soul.  The reader must realize this, and must realize that their own travail continues.  The birth process is beginning, but deliverance, delivery, is not yet at hand.  Certainly, Virgil's position here is genuinely tragic, in that the triumph of his style, and even the prophetic nature of his work, cannot lead to the triumph of the soul.  All this perhaps is the result of the aspirant's "timorous" pondering in the previous canto.  This timorous tentativeness puts him on the very ground of thought, and if he is to move it all, it can only be to ascend.

1  The natural thirst, that ne'er is satisfied
2  Excepting with the water for whose grace
3  The woman of Samaria besought,

1  La sete natural che mai non sazia
2  se non con l'acqua onde la femminetta
3  samaritana domandò la grazia,

4  Put me in travail, and haste goaded me
5  Along the encumbered path behind my Leader
6  And I was pitying that righteous vengeance;

4  mi travagliava, e pungeami la fretta
5  per la 'mpacciata via dietro al mio duca,
6  e condoleami a la giusta vendetta.

7  And lo! in the same manner as Luke writeth
8  That Christ appeared to two upon the way
9  From the sepulchral cave already risen,

7  Ed ecco, sì come ne scrive Luca
8  che Cristo apparve a' due ch'erano in via,
9  già surto fuor de la sepulcral buca,

10  A shade appeared to us, and came behind us,
11  Down gazing on the prostrate multitude,
12  Nor were we ware of it, until it spake,

10  ci apparve un'ombra, e dietro a noi venìa,
11  dal piè guardando la turba che giace;
12  né ci addemmo di lei, sì parlò pria,

13  Saying, "My brothers, may God give you peace!"
14  We turned us suddenly, and Virgilius rendered
15  To him the countersign thereto conforming.

13  dicendo: “O frati miei, Dio vi dea pace.”
14  Noi ci volgemmo sùbiti, e Virgilio
15  rendéli 'l cenno ch'a ciò si conface.

16  Thereon began he: "In the blessed council,
17  Thee may the court veracious place in peace,
18  That me doth banish in eternal exile!"

16  Poi cominciò: “Nel beato concilio
17  ti ponga in pace la verace corte
18  che me rilega ne l'etterno essilio.”

19  "How," said he, and the while we went with speed,
20  "If ye are shades whom God deigns not on high,
21  Who up his stairs so far has guided you?"

19  “Come!” diss' elli, e parte andavam forte:
20  “se voi siete ombre che Dio sù non degni,
21  chi v'ha per la sua scala tanto scorte?”

22  And said my Teacher: "If thou note the marks
23  Which this one bears, and which the Angel traces
24  Well shalt thou see he with the good must reign.

22  E 'l dottor mio: “Se tu riguardi a' segni
23  che questi porta e che l'angel profila,
24  ben vedrai che coi buon convien ch'e' regni. 

25  But because she who spinneth day and night
26  For him had not yet drawn the distaff off,
27  Which Clotho lays for each one and compacts,

25  Ma perché lei che dì e notte fila
26  non li avea tratta ancora la conocchia
27  che Cloto impone a ciascuno e compila,

28  His soul, which is thy sister and my own,
29  In coming upwards could not come alone,
30  By reason that it sees not in our fashion.

28  l'anima sua, ch'è tua e mia serocchia,
29  venendo sù, non potea venir sola,
30  però ch'al nostro modo non adocchia.

31  Whence I was drawn from out the ample throat
32  Of Hell to be his guide, and I shall guide him
33  As far on as my school has power to lead.

31  Ond' io fui tratto fuor de l'ampia gola
32  d'inferno per mostrarli, e mosterrolli
33  oltre, quanto 'l potrà menar mia scola.

34  But tell us, if thou knowest, why such a shudder
35  Erewhile the mountain gave, and why together
36  All seemed to cry, as far as its moist feet?"

34  Ma dimmi, se tu sai, perché tai crolli
35  diè dianzi 'l monte, e perché tutto ad una
36  parve gridare infino a' suoi piè molli.”

37  In asking he so hit the very eye
38  Of my desire, that merely with the hope
39  My thirst became the less unsatisfied.

37  Sì mi diè, dimandando, per la cruna
38  del mio disio, che pur con la speranza
39  si fece la mia sete men digiuna.

40  "Naught is there," he began, "that without order
41  May the religion of the mountain feel,
42  Nor aught that may be foreign to its custom.

40  Quei cominciò: “Cosa non è che sanza
41  ordine senta la religione
42  de la montagna, o che sia fuor d'usanza.

43  Free is it here from every permutation;
44  What from itself heaven in itself receiveth
45  Can be of this the cause, and naught beside;

43  Libero è qui da ogne alterazione:
44  di quel che 'l ciel da sé in sé riceve
45  esser ci puote, e non d'altro, cagione.

46  Because that neither rain, nor hail, nor snow,
47  Nor dew, nor hoar-frost any higher falls
48  Than the short, little stairway of three steps.

46  Per che non pioggia, non grando, non neve,
47  non rugiada, non brina più sù cade
48  che la scaletta di tre gradi breve;

49  Dense clouds do not appear, nor rarefied,
50  Nor coruscation, nor the daughter of Thaumas,
51  That often upon earth her region shifts;
 
49  nuvole spesse non paion né rade,
50  né coruscar, né figlia di Taumante,
51  che di là cangia sovente contrade;

52  No arid vapour any farther rises
53  Than to the top of the three steps I spake of,
54  Whereon the Vicar of Peter has his feet.

52  secco vapor non surge piu avante
53  ch'al sommo d'i tre gradi ch'io parlai,
54  dov' ha 'l vicario di Pietro le piante. 

55  Lower down perchance it trembles less or more,
56  But, for the wind that in the earth is hidden
57  I know not how, up here it never trembled.

55  Trema forse più giù poco o assai;
56  ma per vento che 'n terra si nasconda,
57  non so come, qua sù non tremò mai.

58  It trembles here, whenever any soul
59  Feels itself pure, so that it soars, or moves
60  To mount aloft, and such a cry attends it.

58  Tremaci quando alcuna anima monda
59  sentesi, sì che surga o che si mova
60  per salir sù; e tal grido seconda.

61  Of purity the will alone gives proof,
62  Which, being wholly free to change its convent,
63  Takes by surprise the soul, and helps it fly.

61  De la mondizia sol voler fa prova,
62  che, tutto libero a mutar convento,
63  l'alma sorprende, e di voler le giova.

64  First it wills well; but the desire permits not,
65  Which divine justice with the self-same will
66  There was to sin, upon the torment sets.

64  Prima vuol ben, ma non lascia il talento
65  che divina giustizia contra voglia,
66  come fu al peccar, pone al tormento.

67  And I, who have been lying in this pain
68  Five hundred years and more, but just now felt
69  A free volition for a better seat.

67  E io, che son giaciuto a questa doglia
68  cinquecent' anni e più, pur mo sentii
69  libera volontà di miglior soglia:

70  Therefore thou heardst the earthquake, and the pious
71  Spirits along the mountain rendering praise
72  Unto the Lord, that soon he speed them upwards."

70  però sentisti il tremoto e li pii
71  spiriti per lo monte render lode
72  a quel Segnor, che tosto sù li 'nvii.”

73  So said he to him; and since we enjoy
74  As much in drinking as the thirst is great,
75  I could not say how much it did me good.

73  Così ne disse; e però ch'el si gode
74  tanto del ber quant' è grande la sete,
75  non saprei dir quant' el mi fece prode.

76  And the wise Leader: "Now I see the net
77  That snares you here, and how ye are set free,
78  Why the earth quakes, and wherefore ye rejoice.

76  E 'l savio duca: “Omai veggio la rete
 77  che qui vi 'mpiglia e come si scalappia,
 78  perché ci trema e di che congaudete.

79  Now who thou wast be pleased that I may know;
80  And why so many centuries thou hast here
81  Been lying, let me gather from thy words."

79  Ora chi fosti, piacciati ch'io sappia,
80  e perché tanti secoli giaciuto
81  qui se', ne le parole tue mi cappia.”

82  "In days when the good Titus, with the aid
83  Of the supremest King, avenged the wounds
84  Whence issued forth the blood by Judas sold,

82  “Nel tempo che 'l buon Tito, con l'aiuto
83  del sommo rege, vendicò le fóra
84  ond' uscì 'l sangue per Giuda venduto

85  Under the name that most endures and honours,
86  Was I on earth," that spirit made reply,
87  "Greatly renowned, but not with faith as yet.

85  col nome che più dura e più onora
86  era io di là,” rispuose quello spirto,
87  “famoso assai, ma non con fede ancora.

88  My vocal spirit was so sweet, that Rome
89  Me, a Thoulousian, drew unto herself,
90  Where I deserved to deck my brows with myrtle.

88  Tanto fu dolce mio vocale spirto,
89  che, tolosano, a sé mi trasse Roma,
90  dove mertai le tempie ornar di mirto.

91  Statius the people name me still on earth;
92  I sang of Thebes, and then of great Achilles;
93  But on the way fell with my second burden.

91  Stazio la gente ancor di là mi noma:
92  cantai di Tebe, e poi del grande Achille;
93  ma caddi in via con la seconda soma.

94  The seeds unto my ardour were the sparks
95  Of that celestial flame which heated me,
96  Whereby more than a thousand have been fired;

94  Al mio ardor fuor seme le faville,
95  che mi scaldar, de la divina fiamma
96  onde sono allumati più di mille;

97  Of the Aeneid speak I, which to me
98  A mother was, and was my nurse in song;
99  Without this weighed I not a drachma's weight.

97  de l'Eneïda dico, la qual mamma
98  fummi, e fummi nutrice, poetando:
99  sanz' essa non fermai peso di drama.

100  And to have lived upon the earth what time
101  Virgilius lived, I would accept one sun
102  More than I must ere issuing from my ban."

100  E per esser vivuto di là quando
101  visse Virgilio, assentirei un sole
102  più che non deggio al mio uscir di bando”

103  These words towards me made Virgilius turn
104  With looks that in their silence said, "Be silent!"
105  But yet the power that wills cannot do all things;

103  Volser Virgilio a me queste parole
104  con viso che, tacendo, disse “Taci”;
105  ma non può tutto la virtù che vuole;

106  For tears and laughter are such pursuivants
107  Unto the passion from which each springs forth,
108  In the most truthful least the will they follow.

106  ché riso e pianto son tanto seguaci
107  a la passion di che ciascun si spicca,
108  che men seguon voler ne' più veraci.

109  I only smiled, as one who gives the wink;
110  Whereat the shade was silent, and it gazed
111  Into mine eyes, where most expression dwells;

109  Io pur sorrisi come l'uom ch'ammicca;
110  per che l'ombra si tacque, e riguardommi
111  ne li occhi ove 'l sembiante più si ficca;

112  And, "As thou well mayst consummate a labour
113  So great," it said, "why did thy face just now
114  Display to me the lightning of a smile?"

112  e “Se tanto labore in bene assommi,”
113  disse, “perché la tua faccia testeso
114  un lampeggiar di riso dimostromi?”

115  Now am I caught on this side and on that;
116  One keeps me silent, one to speak conjures me,
117  Wherefore I sigh, and I am understood.

115  Or son io d'una parte e d'altra preso:
116  l'una mi fa tacer, l'altra scongiura
107  ch'io dica; ond' io sospiro, e sono inteso

118  "Speak," said my Master, "and be not afraid
119  Of speaking, but speak out, and say to him
120  What he demands with such solicitude."

118  dal mio maestro, e “Non aver paura,”
119  mi dice, “di parlar; ma parla e digli
120  quel ch'e' dimanda con cotanta cura.”

121  Whence I: "Thou peradventure marvellest,
122  O antique spirit, at the smile I gave;
123  But I will have more wonder seize upon thee.

121  Ond' io: “Forse che tu ti maravigli,
122  antico spirto, del rider ch'io fei;
123  ma più d'ammirazion vo' che ti pigli.

124  This one, who guides on high these eyes of mine,
125  Is that Virgilius, from whom thou didst learn
126  To sing aloud of men and of the Gods.

124  Questi che guida in alto li occhi miei,
125  è quel Virgilio dal qual tu togliesti
126  forte a cantar de li uomini e d'i dèi.

127  If other cause thou to my smile imputedst,
128  Abandon it as false, and trust it was
129  Those words which thou hast spoken concerning him."

127  Se cagion altra al mio rider credesti,
128  lasciala per non vera, ed esser credi
129  quelle parole che di lui dicesti.”

130  Already he was stooping to embrace
131  My Teacher's feet; but he said to him: "Brother,
132  Do not; for shade thou art, and shade beholdest."

130  Già s'inchinava ad abbracciar li piedi
131  al mio dottor, ma el li disse: “Frate,
132  non far, ché tu se' ombra e ombra vedi.”

133  And he uprising: "Now canst thou the sum
134  Of love which warms me to thee comprehend,
135  When this our vanity I disremember,

133  Ed ei surgendo: “Or puoi la quantitate
134  comprender de l'amor ch'a te mi scalda,
135  quand' io dismento nostra vanitate,

136 Treating a shadow as substantial thing."

136  trattando l'ombre come cosa salda.”

Canto XXII
At the very beginning of this Canto, there is a retrograde temporal motion, in as much as the guardian angel of this new cornice has already appeared and already erased from the aspirant's forehead the "P" symbolizing the sin of avarice.  And yet a more surprising time distortion awaits.  The fact that Statius has modeled his verse on Virgil's a century after the maestro's death, is not surprising.  The fact that Dante has also done so, 13 centuries later is not surprising.  The fact that I am reading Dante's Commedia 8 hundred years after it was written is not surprising.  The fact that the post-mortem Virgil has read Statius' work written a more than a century after his death, this is surprising — very.  Because it implies that poetry exists in a sort of atemporal cloud, which any poet may tap into at any time, and so, if this is indeed the case, when I am writing now, Dante is reading me, and the influence runs both ways.  Such a phenomenon is absurd on the plane of historical time.  But not absurd in spiritual and/or poetic time.  For as Jesus affirms: Before Abraham was, I am. Does poetry live in an eternal present, which contains all times, all places, all entities?  Yes, because inspiration cannot be confined.  As we readers probe more deeply into the Commedia, we find that any of its verses might serve as a portal into a limitless domain where time is no longer a prison, and the organ-sack of the body no longer cloisters our identity.  Once we realize this, everywhere we look, ordinary reality is shown to be riddled with lacunae, wounds, holes, escape hatches, portals, and as does the Angel who erased another emblem of sin form the aspirant’s brow, we hear or internally sing that unfinished hymn, which hear an unseen voice voices.  There is always the effect here of unseen or untraceable cause, always the not quite here here, and even the living body of flesh, and blood, and bones, becomes lighter, becomes perforated with insight, becomes like the swift-footed spirits infused with the lightness of love.  The fact that centuries of commentators still ponder and squabble over the shapes of the ditches of hell, the cornices of purgatory, still seriously discuss the psychology of Virgil, or of the multitudes of shades, still puzzle over the time by the placement of fictional (or are they?) celestial bodies, still probe and concretize innumerable scenes, and ephemeralizing innumerable philosophical and theological conundrums shows us how skillful Dante is in creating a reality in his poem that becomes more compelling than the world of the reader beyond the text.  This poem warps our world, shows us its paradoxes, and everywhere burgeons with a way out, a way through the greater and far more painful absurdity of our mortal existence.  A great deal of what we read in this canto is a litany of names, of entities, most of who are in limbo, a strange place indeed for these pagan poets, where they live in a hell without suffering, where they exist in a hospital of the not quite there, not quite complete, where they express experiences that were never quite real, nor ever quite unreal.  Here, Dante, the supreme poet, talks about poetry's limitations, why poetry must be the servant of faith, and, paradoxically, how faith is revealed in the poetry of the scriptures.  Interestingly enough, this canto contains the single instance of what the commentators call a "nod", a temporary loss of consciousness, in so far as he has bilocated Manto, a soothsayer, both in limbo in and in the eighth circle of Hell.  Was this deliberate?  A way to show his own limitations?  In a like manner Amish quilt makers always incorporate on fouled stitch in their work, because only God can be perfect.  Whether this "mistake" were conscious or not, hardly matters, it's there, and it reinforces this theme of poetry's limitations.  Every poet, every proof reader, every programmer, every engineer knows that there are invariable little nodes of chaos embedded in even the most orderly of assemblages, almost as if perfection, to prove itself perfect, must retain a bit of chaos so that it will not become too static, and thereby, too oppressive.    Commentators have pointed out that Dante had little direct knowledge, if any, of the names he immortalizes, they are shadows of that cloud of poetry, which directly or indirectly, feed the entire corpus of the art.  Perhaps Dante is showing us another miracle here, one which infuses any language with all languages, as Joyce shows us in Finnegans Wake, a miracle which postulates something like a diffuse mystery of affinities, and perhaps the tree, we see at the end of this canto, with its curious shape, more like that of a fountain, than a tree, is really the stream of inspiration which every poet is presented with, its fruits, so tempting, and so nourishing, being those insights that poets derive from other poets, and not from some inner source burgeoning forth from life itself, and even more richly, from that faith which promises transcendence.  I would surmise that every symbol, every conversation, every image in this canto, and in all the versus of the Commedia, like this fountaining tree, are a kind of holographic waveform that may be interpreted by each reader in a way most conducive to their own understanding, their own growing-tip, their own need for nourishment or need for abstinence.  But we select parts and take them for the whole, and every bite from this tree of knowledge, serves as a kind of truncated summary which suggests to us that we are wisdom-fed, when really we are looking at ourselves in a funhouse mirror, which shows us as arrogantly obese with knowledge when, in actuality, that which we only think we know has left us extremely emaciated.  Whatever the case, Dante, the supreme poet, who does not in this canto enter into this discussion of the other poets, shows us by his silence, the very limitations of poetry, when compared to the fulness of faith.  He shows us that the greatest of poems are cross-fed by an unseen fountain and a mystical cloud, and do in fact achieve their greatness by incorporating in their expression the incomplete, the limited, the retrograde, the silence of the greatest in the presence of the merely vocal great.       

1  Already was the Angel left behind us,
2  The Angel who to the sixth round had turned us,
3  Having erased one mark from off my face;

1  Già era l'angel dietro a noi rimaso,
2  l'angel che n'avea vòlti al sesto giro,
3  avendomi dal viso un colpo raso;

4  And those who have in justice their desire
5  Had said to us, "Beati," in their voices,
6  With "sitio," and without more ended it.

4  e quei c'hanno a giustizia lor disiro
5  detto n'avea beati, e le sue voci
6  con 'sitiunt,' sanz'altro, ciò forniro.

7  And I, more light than through the other passes,
8  Went onward so, that without any labour
9  I followed upward the swift-footed spirits;

7  E io più lieve che per l'altre foci
8  m'andava, sì che sanz'alcun labore
9  seguiva in sù li spiriti veloci;

10  When thus Virgilius began: "The love
11  Kindled by virtue aye another kindles,
12  Provided outwardly its flame appear.

10  quando Virgilio incominciò: “Amore,
11  acceso di virtù, sempre altro accese,
12  pur che la fiamma sua paresse fore;

13  Hence from the hour that Juvenal descended
14  Among us into the infernal Limbo,
15  Who made apparent to me thy affection,

13  onde da l'ora che tra noi discese
14   nel limbo de lo 'nferno Giovenale,
15  che la tua affezion mi fé palese,

16  My kindliness towards thee was as great
17  As ever bound one to an unseen person,
18  So that these stairs will now seem short to me.

16  mia benvoglienza inverso te fu quale
17  più strinse mai di non vista persona,
18  sì ch'or mi parran corte queste scale.

19  But tell me, and forgive me as a friend,
20  If too great confidence let loose the rein,
21  And as a friend now hold discourse with me;

19  Ma dimmi, e come amico mi perdona
20  se troppo sicurtà m'allarga il freno,
21  e come amico omai meco ragiona:

22  How was it possible within thy breast
23  For avarice to find place, 'mid so much wisdom
24  As thou wast filled with by thy diligence?"

22  come poté trovar dentro al tuo seno
23  loco avarizia, tra cotanto senno
24  di quanto per tua cura fosti pieno?”

25  These words excited Statius at first
26  Somewhat to laughter; afterward he answered:
27  "Each word of thine is love's dear sign to me.

25  Queste parole Stazio mover fenno
26  un poco a riso pria; poscia rispuose:
27  “Ogne tuo dir d'amor m'è caro cenno.

28  Verily oftentimes do things appear
29  Which give fallacious matter to our doubts,
30  Instead of the true causes which are hidden!

28  Veramente più volte appaion cose
29  che danno a dubitar falsa matera
30  per le vere ragion che son nascose.

31  Thy question shows me thy belief to be
32  That I was niggard in the other life,
33  It may be from the circle where I was;

31  La tua dimanda tuo creder m'avvera
32  esser ch'i' fossi avaro in l'altra vita,
33  forse per quella cerchia dov'io era.

34  Therefore know thou, that avarice was removed
35  Too far from me; and this extravagance
36  Thousands of lunar periods have punished.

34  Or sappi ch'avarizia fu partita
35  troppo da me, e questa dismisura
36  migliaia di lunari hanno punita.

37  And were it not that I my thoughts uplifted,
38  When I the passage heard where thou exclaimest,
39  As if indignant, unto human nature,

37  e se non fosse ch'io drizzai mia cura,
38  quand'io intesi là dove tu chiame,
39  crucciato quasi a l'umana natura:

40  'To what impellest thou not, O cursed hunger
41  Of gold, the appetite of mortal men?'
42  Revolving I should feel the dismal joustings.

40  'Per che non reggi tu, o sacra fame
41  de l'oro, l'appetito de' mortali?',
42  voltando sentirei le giostre grame.

43  Then I perceived the hands could spread too wide
44  Their wings in spending, and repented me
45  As well of that as of my other sins;

43  Allor m'accorsi che troppo aprir l'ali
44  potean le mani a spendere, e pente'mi
45  così di quel come de li altri mali.

46  How many with shorn hair shall rise again
47  Because of ignorance, which from this sin
48  Cuts off repentance living and in death!

46  Quanti risurgeran coi crini scemi
47  per ignoranza,che di questa pecca
48  toglie 'l penter vivendo e ne li stremi!

49  And know that the transgression which rebuts
50  By direct opposition any sin
51  Together with it here its verdure dries.

51  E sappie che la colpa che rimbecca
52  per dritta opposizione alcun peccato,
53  con esso insieme qui suo verde secca;

52  Therefore if I have been among that folk
53  Which mourns its avarice, to purify me,
54  For its opposite has this befallen me."

54  però, s'io son tra quella gente stato
55  che piange l'avarizia, per purgarmi,
56  per lo contrario suo m'è incontrato.”

55  "Now when thou sangest the relentless weapons
56  Of the twofold affliction of Jocasta,"
57  The singer of the Songs Bucolic said,

55  “Or quando tu cantasti le crude armi
56  de la doppia trestizia di Giocasta,”
57  disse 'l cantor de' buccolici carmi,

58  "From that which Clio there with thee preludes,
59  It does not seem that yet had made thee faithful
60  That faith without which no good works suffice.
 
58  “per quello che Clïò teco lì tasta,
59  non par che ti facesse ancor fedele
60  la fede, sanza qual ben far non basta.

61  If this be so, what candles or what sun
62  Scattered thy darkness so that thou didst trim
63  Thy sails behind the Fisherman thereafter?"

61  Se così è, qual sole o quai candele
62  ti stenebraron sì, che tu drizzasti
63  poscia di retro al pescator le vele?”

64  And he to him: "Thou first directedst me
65  Towards Parnassus, in its grots to drink,
66  And first concerning God didst me enlighten.

64  Ed elli a lui: “Tu prima m'invïasti
65  verso Parnaso a ber ne le sue grotte,
66  e prima appresso Dio m'alluminasti.

67  Thou didst as he who walketh in the night,
68  Who bears his light behind, which helps him not,
69  But wary makes the persons after him,

67  Facesti come quei che va di notte,
68  che porta il lume dietro e sé non giova,
69  ma dopo sé fa le persone dotte,

70  When thou didst say: 'The age renews itself,
71  Justice returns, and man's primeval time,
72  And a new progeny descends from heaven.'

70  quando dicesti: 'Secol si rinova;
71  torna giustizia e primo tempo umano,
72  e progenïe scende da ciel nova.'

73  Through thee I Poet was, through thee a Christian;
74  But that thou better see what I design,
75  To colour it will I extend my hand.

73  Per te poeta fui, per te cristiano:
74  ma perché veggi mei ciò ch'io disegno,
75  a colorare stenderò la mano.

76  Already was the world in every part
77  Pregnant with the true creed, disseminated
78  By messengers of the eternal kingdom;

76  Già era 'l mondo tutto quanto pregno
77  de la vera credenza, seminata
78  per li messaggi de l'etterno regno;

79  And thy assertion, spoken of above,
80  With the new preachers was in unison;
81  Whence I to visit them the custom took.

79  e la parola tua sopra toccata
80  si consonava a' nuovi predicanti;
81  ond'io a visitarli presi usata.

82  Then they became so holy in my sight,
83  That, when Domitian persecuted them,
84  Not without tears of mine were their laments;

82  Vennermi poi parendo tanto santi,
83  che, quando Domizian li perseguette,
84  sanza mio lagrimar non fur lor pianti;

85  And all the while that I on earth remained,
86  Them I befriended, and their upright customs
87  Made me disparage all the other sects.

85  e mentre che di là per me si stette,
86  io li sovvenni, e i lor dritti costumi
87  fer dispregiare a me tutte altre sette.

88  And ere I led the Greeks unto the rivers
89  Of Thebes, in poetry, I was baptized,
90  But out of fear was covertly a Christian,

88  E pria ch'io conducessi i greci a' fiumi
89  di Tebe poetando, ebb' io battesmo;
90  ma per paura chiuso cristian fu'mi,

91  For a long time professing paganism;
92  And this lukewarmness caused me the fourth circle
93  To circuit round more than four centuries.

91  lungamente mostrando paganesmo;
92  e questa tepidezza il quarto cerchio
93  cerchiar mi fé più che 'l quarto centesmo.

94  Thou, therefore, who hast raised the covering
95  That hid from me whatever good I speak of,
96  While in ascending we have time to spare,

94  Tu dunque, che levato hai il coperchio
95  che m'ascondeva quanto bene io dico,
96  mentre che del salire avem soverchio,

97  Tell me, in what place is our friend Terentius,
98  Caecilius, Plautus, Varro, if thou knowest;
99  Tell me if they are damned, and in what alley."

97  dimmi dov' è Terrenzio nostro antico,
98  Cecilio e Plauto e Varro, se lo sai:
99  dimmi se son dannati, e in qual vico.”
100  "These, Persius and myself, and others many,"
101  Replied my Leader, "with that Grecian are
102  Whom more than all the rest the Muses suckled,

100  “Costoro e Persio e io e altri assai,”
101  rispuose il duca mio, “siam con quel Greco
102  che le Muse lattar più ch'altri mai,

103  In the first circle of the prison blind;
104  Ofttimes we of the mountain hold discourse
105  Which has our nurses ever with itself.

103  nel primo cinghio del carcere cieco;
104  spesse fïate ragioniam del monte
105  che sempre ha le nutrice nostre seco.

106  Euripides is with us, Antiphon,
107  Simonides, Agatho, and many other
108  Greeks who of old their brows with laurel decked.

106  Euripide v'è nosco e Antifonte,
107  Simonide, Agatone e altri piùe
108  Greci che già di lauro ornar la fronte.

109  There some of thine own people may be seen,
110  Antigone, Deiphile and Argia,
111  And there Ismene mournful as of old.

109  Quivi si veggion de le genti tue
110  Antigone, Deïfile e Argia,
111  e Ismene sì trista come fue.

112  There she is seen who pointed out Langia;
113  There is Tiresias' daughter, and there Thetis,
114  And there Deidamia with her sisters."

112  Védeisi quella che mostrò Langia;
113  èvvi la figlia di Tiresia, e Teti,
114  e con le suore sue Deïdamia.”

115  Silent already were the poets both,
116  Attent once more in looking round about,
117  From the ascent and from the walls released;

115  Tacevansi ambedue già li poeti,
116  di novo attenti a riguardar dintorno,
117  liberi da saliri e da pareti;

118  And four handmaidens of the day already
119  Were left behind, and at the pole the fifth
120  Was pointing upward still its burning horn,

118  e già le quattro ancelle eran del giorno
119  rimase a dietro, e la quinta era al temo,
120  drizzando pur in sù l'ardente corno,

121  What time my Guide: "I think that tow'rds the edge
122  Our dexter shoulders it behoves us turn,
123  Circling the mount as we are wont to do."

121  quando il mio duca: “Io credo ch'a lo stremo
122 le destre spalle volger ne convegna,
123  girando il monte come far solemo.”

124  Thus in that region custom was our ensign;
125  And we resumed our way with less suspicion
126  For the assenting of that worthy soul

124  Così l'usanza fu lì nostra insegna,
125  e prendemmo la via con men sospetto
126  per l'assentir di quell' anima degna.

127  They in advance went on, and I alone
128  Behind them, and I listened to their speech,
129  Which gave me lessons in the art of song.

127  Elli givan dinanzi, e io soletto
128  di retro, e ascoltava i lor sermoni,
129  ch'a poetar mi davano intelletto.

130  But soon their sweet discourses interrupted
131  A tree which midway in the road we found,
132  With apples sweet and grateful to the smell.

130  Ma tosto ruppe le dolci ragioni
131  un alber che trovammo in mezza strada,
132  con pomi a odorar soavi e buoni;

133  And even as a fir-tree tapers upward
134  From bough to bough, so downwardly did that;
135  I think in order that no one might climb it.

133  e come abete in alto si digrada
134  di ramo in ramo, cosi quello in giuso,
135  cred' io, perché persona sù non vada.

136  On that side where our pathway was enclosed
137  Fell from the lofty rock a limpid water,
138  And spread itself abroad upon the leaves.

136  Dal lato onde 'l cammin nostro era chiuso,
137  cadea de l'alta roccia un liquor chiaro
138  e si spandeva per le foglie suso.

139  The Poets twain unto the tree drew near,
140  And from among the foliage a voice
141  Cried: "Of this food ye shall have scarcity."

139  Li due poeti a l'alber s'appressaro;
140  e una voce per entro le fronde
141  gridò: “Di questo cibo avrete caro.”

142  Then said: "More thoughtful Mary was of making
143  The marriage feast complete and honourable,
144  Than of her mouth which now for you responds;

142  Poi disse: “Più pensava Maria onde
143  fosser le nozze orrevoli e intere,
144  ch'a la sua bocca, ch'or per voi risponde.

145  And for their drink the ancient Roman women
146  With water were content; and Daniel
147  Disparaged food, and understanding won.

145  E le Romane antiche, per lor bere,
146  contente furon d'acqua; e Danïello
147  dispregiò cibo e acquistò savere.

148  The primal age was beautiful as gold;
149  Acorns it made with hunger savorous,
150  And nectar every rivulet with thirst.

148  Lo secol primo, quant' oro fu bello,
149  fé savorose con fame le ghiande,
150  e nettare con sete ogne ruscello.

151  Honey and locusts were the aliments
152  That fed the Baptist in the wilderness;
153  Whence he is glorious, and so magnified

151  Mele e locuste furon le vivande
152  che nodriro il Batista nel diserto;
153  per ch'elli è glorïoso e tanto grande

154  As by the Evangel is revealed to you."

154  quanto per lo Vangelio v'è aperto.”

Canto XXIII
On this cornice devoted to the sin of gluttony, we learn that all the fat added to the basic bones — i.e., the just necessities — of life is subtracted by a hunger and thirst for that mysterious tree whose icon completed the last canto.  The shades here are reduced to that single longing, and for this reason, for all their suffering, they are discovering the paradoxical truth that freedom does not come from giving oneself the licence to over-indulge, but rather by a proper restraint.  But here, because of their previous excesses, the penitents must ride the pendulum as it swings from one extreme to another, and they find themselves reduced to a leprous emaciation.  There is something very Aristotelian about this, and a damned hard way to discover a golden mean.  But put another way, that out of the pleasure of indulging in the extreme sensual pleasure of a tongue devoted to eating is born, here in purgatory, the extreme spiritual pleasure of using the tongue for prayer.  The rather excruciating analogy for this is Christ crying out in the extremity of his pain on the cross, the terrible prayer of confused forsakenness.  Here, Jesus does not take the atheistical position of "there is no God," but rather cries to re-establish an intimacy with God through the inexplicable suffering of his crucifixion.  Pain, grief, hopelessness, despair are all excoriations, the stripping away of any illusion, including the supreme illusion of the permanence of mortal life — because who in the midst of life, can believe in their own death? — and a return to something barebones, an initial condition, which never explains itself, because its very Isness needs no justification.  In extreme states of either suffering or bliss, as the pendulum swings to the farthest point on its arch, we get a glimpse of the ever-mysterious beyond, and it is this glimpse of the unattainable, that draws as back to the mean, almost as if we were children, curious about a flame, who, reach into it, only to feel that blistering revelation, from which all mortal bodies, quickly and reflexively withdraw.  The real miracle of Dante's pilgrimage as a living person, as a poet, and as a mendicant is his courage in exploring these extremes, while still remaining centered in his task.  What makes this grace possible?  I think two things.  On the one hand a thirst and hunger for knowledge, a curiosity to discover how language can explore and expose the inner workings of history, of personalities, of geographies, of nature, and of the roots of suffering and joy — and it is this curiosity which Commedia personifies in Virgil.  He satisfies that curiosity with the wisdom that can be satisfied by mere knowledge.  But knowledge is limited, while grace is not.  Grace is based on that which can never be satisfied by mere knowledge, which in the Commedia, is not just Dante's love for Beatrice, but even more crucially, her love for him.  As the reader has moved steadily up the mount of purgatory, more and more, this curiosity is being satisfied, not by Virgilian knowledge, but by a continually reiterated promise: Your curiosity will be obviated by love.  You will see your version of Beatrice again.  This promise is faith, and Donati's story contrasting the licentious women of Florence and the virtue of his widow, Nella, whose prayers have quite literally drawn him out of Hell, is meant, I believe, as a foreshadowing of Dante's coming meeting with Beatrice.  If we remember those passages in Vita Nuova wherein the very sight of Beatrice scattered his senses and made him almost incapable of movement, we see the confusion of bliss which has swung to the other extreme from the confusion of Jesus on the cross.  On what subject does prayer, contemplation, and meditation dwell?  This canto's very first verses of the naive aspirant being mesmerized by the this strange green tree and its company of little (trivial?) birds provides the frame for what follows.  And what follows concludes with a reiteration of that earthshaking liberation of salvation, by which every soul in purgatory is shaken.   

1  The while among the verdant leaves mine eyes
2  I riveted, as he is wont to do
3  Who wastes his life pursuing little birds,

1  Mentre che li occhi per la fronda verde
2  ficcava ïo sì come far suole
3  chi dietro a li uccellin sua vita perde,

4  My more than Father said unto me: "Son,
5  Come now; because the time that is ordained us
6  More usefully should be apportioned out."

4  lo più che padre mi dicea: “Figliuole,
5  vienne oramai, ché 'l tempo che n'è imposto
6  più utilmente compartir si vuole.”

7  I turned my face and no less soon my steps
8  Unto the Sages, who were speaking so
9  They made the going of no cost to me;

7  Io volsi 'l viso, e 'l passo non men tosto,
8  appresso i savi, che parlavan sìe,
9  che l'andar mi facean di nullo costo.

10  And lo! were heard a song and a lament,
11  "Labia mea, Domine," in fashion
12  Such that delight and dolence it brought forth.

10  Ed ecco piangere e cantar s'udìe
11 “Labïa mëa, Domine” per modo
12  tal, che diletto e doglia parturìe.

13  "O my sweet Father, what is this I hear?"
14  Began I; and he answered: "Shades that go
15  Perhaps the knot unloosing of their debt."

13  “O dolce padre, che è quel ch'i' odo?”
14  comincia' io; ed elli: “Ombre che vanno
15  forse di lor dover solvendo il nodo.”

16  In the same way that thoughtful pilgrims do,
17  Who, unknown people on the road o'ertaking,
18  Turn themselves round to them, and do not stop,

16  Sì come i peregrin pensosi fanno,
17  giugnendo per cammin gente non nota,
18  che si volgono ad essa e non restanno,

19  Even thus, behind us with a swifter motion
20  Coming and passing onward, gazed upon us
21  A crowd of spirits silent and devout.

19  così di retro a noi, più tosto mota,
20  venendo e trapassando ci ammirava
21  d'anime turba tacita e devota.

22  Each in his eyes was dark and cavernous,
23  Pallid in face, and so emaciate
24  That from the bones the skin did shape itself.

22  Ne li occhi era ciascuna oscura e cava,
23  palida ne la faccia, e tanto scema
24  che da l'ossa la pelle s'informava.

25  I do not think that so to merest rind
26  Could Erisichthon have been withered up
27  By famine, when most fear he had of it.

25  Non credo che così a buccia strema
26  Erisittone fosse fatto secco,
27  per digiunar, quando più n'ebbe tema.

28  Thinking within myself I said: "Behold,
29  This is the folk who lost Jerusalem,
30  When Mary made a prey of her own son."

28  Io dicea fra me stesso pensando: “Ecco
29  la gente che perdé Ierusalemme,
30  quando Maria nel figlio diè di becco!”

31  Their sockets were like rings without the gems;
32  Whoever in the face of men reads 'omo'
33  Might well in these have recognised the 'm.'

31  Parean l'occhiaie anella sanza gemme:
32  chi nel viso de li uomini legge “omo”
33  ben avria quivi conosciuta l'emme. 

34  Who would believe the odour of an apple,
35  Begetting longing, could consume them so,
36  And that of water, without knowing how?

34  Chi crederebbe che l'odor d'un pomo
35  sì governasse, generando brama,
36  e quel d'un'acqua, non sappiendo como?

37  I still was wondering what so famished them,
38  For the occasion not yet manifest
39  Of their emaciation and sad squalor;

37  Già era in ammirar che sì li affama,
38  per la cagione ancor non manifesta
39  di lor magrezza e di lor trista squama,

40  And lo! from out the hollow of his head
41  His eyes a shade turned on me, and looked keenly;
42  Then cried aloud: "What grace to me is this?"

40  ed ecco del profondo de la testa
41  volse a me li occhi un'ombra e guardò fiso;
42  poi gridò forte: “Qual grazia m'è questa?”

43  Never should I have known him by his look;
44  But in his voice was evident to me
45  That which his aspect had suppressed within it.

43  Mai non l'avrei riconosciuto al viso;
44  ma ne la voce sua mi fu palese
45  ciò che l'aspetto in sé avea conquiso.

46  This spark within me wholly re-enkindled
47  My recognition of his altered face,
48  And I recalled the features of Forese.

46  Questa favilla tutta mi raccese
47  mia conoscenza a la cangiata labbia,
48  e ravvisai la faccia di Forese.

49  "Ah, do not look at this dry leprosy,"
50  Entreated he, "which doth my skin discolour,
51  Nor at default of flesh that I may have;

49  “Deh, non contendere a l'asciutta scabbia
50  che mi scolora,” pregava, “la pelle,
51  né a difetto di carne ch'io abbia;

52  But tell me truth of thee, and who are those
53  Two souls, that yonder make for thee an escort;
54  Do not delay in speaking unto me."

52  ma dimmi il ver di te, dì chi son quelle
53  due anime che là ti fanno scorta;
54  non rimaner che tu non mi favelle!”

55  "That face of thine, which dead I once bewept,
56  Gives me for weeping now no lesser grief,"
57  I answered him, "beholding it so changed!

55  “La faccia tua, ch'io lagrimai già morta,
56  mi dà di pianger mo non minor doglia,”
57  rispuos' io lui, “veggendola sì torta.

58  But tell me, for God's sake, what thus denudes you?
59  Make me not speak while I am marvelling,
60  For ill speaks he who's full of other longings."

58  Però mi dì, per Dio, che sì vi sfoglia;
59  non mi far dir mentr' io mi maraviglio,
60  ché mal può dir chi è pien d'altra voglia.”

61  And he to me: "From the eternal council
62  Falls power into the water and the tree
63  Behind us left, whereby I grow so thin.

61  Ed elli a me: “De l'etterno consiglio
62  cade vertù ne l'acqua e ne la pianta
63  rimasa dietro, ond' io sì m'assottiglio.

64  All of this people who lamenting sing,
65  For following beyond measure appetite
66  In hunger and thirst are here re-sanctified.

64  Tutta esta gente che piangendo canta
65  per seguitar la gola oltra misura,
66  in fame e 'n sete qui si rifà santa.

67  Desire to eat and drink enkindles in us
68  The scent that issues from the apple-tree,
69  And from the spray that sprinkles o'er the verdure;

67  Di bere e di mangiar n'accende cura
68  l'odor ch'esce del pomo e de lo sprazzo
69  che si distende su per sua verdura.

70  And not a single time alone, this ground
71  Encompassing, is refreshed our pain,—
72  I say our pain, and ought to say our solace,—

70  E non pur una volta, questo spazzo
71  girando, si rinfresca nostra pena:
72  io dico pena, e dovria dir sollazzo,

73  For the same wish doth lead us to the tree
74  Which led the Christ rejoicing to say 'Eli,'
75  When with his veins he liberated us."

73  ché quella voglia a li alberi ci mena
74  che menò Cristo lieto a dire 'Elì,'
75  quando ne liberò con la sua vena.”

76  And I to him: "Forese, from that day
77  When for a better life thou changedst worlds,
78  Up to this time five years have not rolled round.

76  E io a lui: “Forese, da quel dì
77  nel qual mutasti mondo a miglior vita,
78  cinqu' anni non son vòlti infino a qui.

79  If sooner were the power exhausted in thee
80  Of sinning more, than thee the hour surprised
81  Of that good sorrow which to God reweds us,

79  Se prima fu la possa in te finita
80  di peccar più, che sovvenisse l'ora
81  del buon dolor ch'a Dio ne rimarita,

82  How hast thou come up hitherward already?
83  I thought to find thee down there underneath,
84  Where time for time doth restitution make."

82  come se' tu qua sù venuto ancora?
83  Io ti credea trovar là giù di sotto,
84  dove tempo per tempo si ristora.”

85  And he to me: "Thus speedily has led me
86  To drink of the sweet wormwood of these torments,
87  My Nella with her overflowing tears;

85  Ond' elli a me: “Sì tosto m'ha condotto
86  a ber lo dolce assenzo d'i martìri
87  la Nella mia con suo pianger dirotto.

88  She with her prayers devout and with her sighs
89  Has drawn me from the coast where one where one awaits,
90  And from the other circles set me free.

88  Con suoi prieghi devoti e con sospiri
89  tratto m'ha de la costa ove s'aspetta,
90  e liberato m'ha de li altri giri.

91  So much more dear and pleasing is to God
92  My little widow, whom so much I loved,
93  As in good works she is the more alone;

91  Tanto è a Dio più cara e più diletta
92  la vedovella mia, che molto amai,
93  quanto in bene operare è più soletta;

94  For the Barbagia of Sardinia
95  By far more modest in its women is
96  Than the Barbagia I have left her in.

94  ché la Barbagia di Sardigna assai
95  ne le femmine sue più è pudica
96  che la Barbagia dov' io la lasciai.

97  O brother sweet, what wilt thou have me say?
98  A future time is in my sight already,
99  To which this hour will not be very old,

97  O dolce frate, che vuo' tu ch'io dica?
98  Tempo futuro m'è già nel cospetto,
99  cui non sarà quest' ora molto antica,

100  When from the pulpit shall be interdicted
101  To the unblushing womankind of Florence
102  To go about displaying breast and paps.

100  nel qual sarà in pergamo interdetto
101  a le sfacciate donne fiorentine
102  l'andar mostrando con le poppe il petto.

103  What savages were e'er, what Saracens,
104  Who stood in need, to make them covered go,
105  Of spiritual or other discipline?

103  Quai barbare fuor mai, quai saracine,
104  cui bisognasse, par farle ir coperte,
105  o spiritali o altre discipline?

106  But if the shameless women were assured
107  Of what swift Heaven prepares for them, already
108  Wide open would they have their mouths to howl;

106  Ma se le svergognate fosser certe
107  di quel che 'l ciel veloce loro ammanna,
108  già per urlare avrian le bocche aperte;

109  For if my foresight here deceive me not,
110  They shall be sad ere he has bearded cheeks
111  Who now is hushed to sleep with lullaby.

109  ché, se l'antiveder qui non m'inganna,
110  prima fien triste che le guance impeli
111  colui che mo si consola con nanna.

112  O brother, now no longer hide thee from me;
113  See that not only I, but all these people
114  Are gazing there, where thou dost veil the sun."

112  Deh, frate, or fa che più non mi ti celi!
113  vedi che non pur io, ma questa gente
114  tutta rimira là dove 'l sol veli.”

115  Whence I to him: "If thou bring back to mind
116  What thou with me hast been and I with thee,
117  The present memory will be grievous still.

115  Per ch'io a lui: “Se tu riduci a mente
116  qual fosti meco, e qual io teco fui,
117  ancor fia grave il memorar presente.

118  Out of that life he turned me back who goes
119  In front of me, two days agone when round
120  The sister of him yonder showed herself,"

118  Di quella vita mi volse costui
119  che mi va innanzi, l'altr' ier, quando tonda
120  vi si mostrò la suora di colui,”

121  And to the sun I pointed. "Through the deep
122  Night of the truly dead has this one led me,
123  With this true flesh, that follows after him.

121  e 'l sol mostrai; “costui per la profonda
122  notte menato m'ha d'i veri morti
123  con questa vera carne che 'l seconda.

124  Thence his encouragements have led me up,
125  Ascending and still circling round the mount
126  That you doth straighten, whom the world made crooked.

124  Indi m'han tratto sù li suoi conforti,
124  salendo e rigirando la montagna
125  che drizza voi che 'l mondo fece torti. 

127  He says that he will bear me company,
128  Till I shall be where Beatrice will be;
129  There it behoves me to remain without him.

127  Tanto dice di farmi sua compagna
128  che io sarò là dove fia Beatrice;
128  quivi convien che sanza lui rimagna.

130  This is Virgilius, who thus says to me,"
131  And him I pointed at; "the other is
132  That shade for whom just now shook every slope

130  Virgilio è questi che così mi dice,”
131  e addita'lo; “e quest' altro è quell' ombra
132  per cuï scosse dianzi ogne pendice

133  Your realm, that from itself discharges him."

133  lo vostro regno, che da sé lo sgombra.”

Canto XXIV
One feature of Dante's style that made the Commedia especially alive for his contemporaries and especially daunting for each generation since is that he names names.  Naming comes to the forefront in this canto, although there is hardly a canto in the poem wherein it is not featured, so that we have to ask, for Dante, What's in a name?  Names are the ego's boast, but does even our own name belong to us?  Or is it something like a linguistic pheromone that marks our passage through a variety of points of view, a social orientation and navigation device, that leaves it beaconing marker beeping in times and places, in families, in languages, in occupations, in the class distinctions of human primate troop hierarchies, in ancestral catalogs, in communal memory, or as exemplars of praise or infamy in systems of morality.  Names also provide a way to coordinate the action of pack hunters, to identify skills and occupation, and perhaps, most importantly of all, as a way to knit together a gossip community which may refer to a person, discuss them, probe their influences, when they are not physically present, or even if they are dead.  Names are file markers to trigger memory and by which we might deduce the outlines of a hypothetical future or of the loka of such realms as Hell, Purgatory, and Heaven.  Forese says that the necessity for his naming the shades on this cornice is derived from the circumstance that emaciation has so distorted their features that they would otherwise be unrecognizable, and no doubt it is true that most of us have dreams, in which a figure appears, whose features are a mystery, but whom nevertheless, we know, that this image represents our mother, a friend or even ourselves.  Naming goes deep, and is so essential that current research suggests (See Virginia Morell's book: Animal Wise) that many other animals, also have ways of distinguishing individuals.  This canto continues the discussion of poetry, the quintessential conjuring of non-present people and of emotional states in the absence of any response trigger in the environment except that of the poem.  In a curious way, Dante is linking poetic inspiration, the soul, naming, faith, transcendence, and immortality.  And how does he connect all these things?  If we recall discussions from the previous cantos, we might already divine the answer.  They spring from the same source as the cosmos itself, and constitute the creating and connecting power that Dante called God, namely: Love.  The following verses are the pivot point for the canto, spoken by Bonaguinta to Dante about Dante:

49  But say if him I here behold, who forth
50  Evoked the new-invented rhymes, beginning,
51  'Ladies, that have intelligence of love?'"

49  Ma dì s'i'veggio qui colui che fore
50  trasse le nove rime, cominciando
51  “Donne ch'avete intelletto d'amore.”

The line "Donne ch'avete intellectto d'amore" (Ladies who have the intelligence of love) comes from a canzone of Dante's in his Vita Nuova, a line which he says was dictated to him by Love, and which he says he noted down.  The poet is the amanuensis of a higher power, and that power is Love.  Simple, no?  How does the poet, the scribe, make himself fit for his task?  Certainly not through the mere knowledge or by egotistical puffing.  He walks along a river, and becomes the mere process of flow, he allows himself to become, like the Virgin Mary, a humble vessel of love's grace.  We have here a very sharp distinction between what Dante claims is the source of his poetry, and the kind of poetry that Virgil and Statius have been talking about.  It is almost as if Dante, absorbed in the talk of the two older poets, lost even in adulation, suddenly wakes up when Forese mentions the name Piccarda.  Forese's sister is in heaven, and Dante now seems to understand as he hears a whole litany of names, that as swiftly as he has been walking, he, like Statius, who has been freed of this cornice, is now being held back by Virgilian concepts of fame, wisdom, and style, and we have here a recapitulation with the line "Ladies that have the intelligence of love," of the scene in which Dante originally saw Beatrice — one lady, among others, whose influence is like that of one star in the heavens spangled with stars. Now he remembers who sent Virgil to begin with, and why.  So why have this discussion on a cornice devoted to gluttony?  Perhaps because, Dante, the aspirant, has repeatedly shown himself to be a glutton in the few cantos previous by too assiduously hungering and thirsting for knowledge (the fountain metaphor, the sponge metaphor).  He is now realizing, as are the shades on this cornice, that his appetite may have been misdirected, and the very reason for this insatiability, this gluttonousness, was because he was feeding his capon with air.  The hunger, the thirst was a craving for love.

None of this would be news to any doctor who has studied the psychology of eating disorders.  If food is not food, but an inadequate substitute for something else, no amount of food will ever satisfy that ghost hunger.  The emaciation of the shades on this cornice shows the true condition of someone who has attempted this substitution.  The trees here represent food that is denied, and which if eaten would perpetuate this state of misplaced desire in the gluttonous.  Gluttony has sexual connotations, gluttony in lust are enmeshed, as Forese misogynistic denunciation of wanton women in the previous canto has informed us.  Nevertheless, as serious as the sin of gluttony is, there is something innocent about it too, as the text shows us by comparing the penitents to children leaping to catch a treat from an adult who withholds it.  All these sins of concupiscence — avarice, gluttony, and lust — are merely perverted excesses of natural desires, and they do not damage the soul so much the spiritual sins of pride, wrath, envy, and sloth.  More tangential to this argument linking gluttony/lust is that which associates the sin of gluttony with the politics of factionalism, and, what is the main argument in this canto the contrasting of vituperation and praise as styles of poetry.  Are we to bark like dogs, as they do in the Inferno, or to sing like angels?  This links the styles of poetry with the impulse which motivates its expression.  Is that impulse destructive, the expression of pride or hatred, or is it one of humility, a longing for justice, an expression of love?  In the first instance, it is the ego's barking, and in the second it is souls submission to the dictations of its own deepest source.  Why link gluttony with poetry?   Because they are both matters of taste, matters of the mouth, as Jesus has said, in Matthew 15: 11: "Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man; but that which moveth out of the mouth, this defileth a man."  And now, lest we misunderstand by this the question of themes, it is not simply what the poet talks about, but how he talks about it, the appropriateness of his rhythms, his harmonies, and that is why Bonaguinta can say that Dante is exhibiting the sweet new style, even when the latter deals with subject that are most vile.    
  
1  Nor speech the going, nor the going that
2  Slackened; but talking we went bravely on,
3  Even as a vessel urged by a good wind.

1  Né il dir l' andar, né l' andar lui più lento
2  facea, ma ragionando andavam forte,
3  sì come nave pinta da buon vento;

4  And shadows, that appeared things doubly dead,
5  From out the sepulchres of their eyes betrayed
6  Wonder at me, aware that I was living.

4  e l'ombre, che parean cose rimorte,
5  per le fosse de li occhi ammirazione
6  traean di me, di mio vivere accorte.

7  And I, continuing my colloquy,
8  Said: "Peradventure he goes up more slowly
9  Than he would do, for other people's sake.

7  E io, continüando al mio sermone,
8  dissi: “Ella sen va sù forse più tarda
9  che non farebbe, per altrui cagione.

10  But tell me, if thou knowest, where is Piccarda;
11  Tell me if any one of note I see
12  Among this folk that gazes at me so."

10  Ma dimmi, se tu sai, dov' è Piccarda;
11  dimmi s'io veggio da notar persona
12  tra questa gente che sì mi riguarda.” 

13  "My sister, who, 'twixt beautiful and good,
14  I know not which was more, triumphs rejoicing
15  Already in her crown on high Olympus."

13  “La mia sorella, che tra bella e buona
14  non so qual fosse più, trïunfa lieta
15  ne l'alto Olimpo già di sua corona.”

16  So said he first, and then: "'Tis not forbidden
17  To name each other here, so milked away
18  Is our resemblance by our dieting.

16  Sì disse prima; e poi: “Qui non si vieta
17  di nominar ciascun, da ch'è sì munta
18  nostra sembianza via per la dïeta.

19  This," pointing with his finger, "is Buonagiunta,
20  Buonagiunta, of Lucca; and that face
21  Beyond him there, more peaked than the others,

19  ”Questi,“ e mostrò col dito, ”è Bonagiunta,
20  Bonagiunta da Lucca; e quella faccia
21  di là da lui più che l'altre trapunta

22  Has held the holy Church within his arms;
23  From Tours was he, and purges by his fasting
24  Bolsena's eels and the Vernaccia wine."

22  ebbe la Santa Chiesa in le sue braccia:
23  dal Torso fu, e purga per digiuno
24  l'anguille di Bolsena e la vernaccia.“

25  He named me many others one by one;
26  And all contented seemed at being named,
27  So that for this I saw not one dark look.

25  Molti altri mi nomò ad uno ad uno;
26  e del nomar parean tutti contenti,
27  sì ch'io però non vidi un atto bruno.

28  I saw for hunger bite the empty air
29  Ubaldin dalla Pila, and Boniface,
30  Who with his crook had pastured many people.

28  Vidi per fame a vòto usar li denti
29  Ubaldin da la Pila e Bonifazio
30  che pasturò col rocco molte genti.

31  I saw Messer Marchese, who had leisure
32  Once at Forli for drinking with less dryness,
33  And he was one who ne'er felt satisfied.

31  Vidi messer Marchese, ch'ebbe spazio
32  già di bere a Forlì con men secchezza,
33  e sì fu tal, che non si sentì sazio.

34  But as he does who scans, and then doth prize
35  One more than others, did I him of Lucca,
36  Who seemed to take most cognizance of me.

34  Ma come fa chi guarda e poi s'apprezza
35  più d'un che d'altro, fei a quel da Lucca,
36  che più parea di me aver contezza.

37  He murmured, and I know not what Gentucca
38   From that place heard I, where he felt the wound
39  Of justice, that doth macerate them so.

37  El mormorava; e non so che ”Gentucca“
38  sentiv' io là, ov' el sentia la piaga
39  de la giustizia che sì li pilucca.

40  "O soul," I said, "that seemest so desirous
41  To speak with me, do so that I may hear thee,
42  And with thy speech appease thyself and me."

40  ”O anima,“ diss' io, ”che par sì vaga
41  di parlar meco, fa sì ch'io t'intenda,
42  e te e me col tuo parlare appaga.“

43  "A maid is born, and wears not yet the veil,"
44  Began he, "who to thee shall pleasant make
45  My city, howsoever men may blame it.

43  ”Femmina è nata, e non porta ancor benda,“
44  cominciò el, ”che ti farà piacere
45  la mia città, come ch'om la riprenda.

46  Thou shalt go on thy way with this prevision;
47  If by my murmuring thou hast been deceived,
48  True things hereafter will declare it to thee.

46  Tu te n'andrai con questo antivedere:
47  se nel mio mormorar prendesti errore,
48  dichiareranti ancor le cose vere.

49  But say if him I here behold, who forth
50  Evoked the new-invented rhymes, beginning,
51  'Ladies, that have intelligence of love?'"

49  Ma dì s'i'veggio qui colui che fore
50  trasse le nove rime, cominciando
51  “Donne ch'avete intelletto d'amore.”

52  And I to him: "One am I, who, whenever
53  Love doth inspire me, note, and in that measure
54  Which he within me dictates, singing go."

52  E io a lui: “I' mi son un che, quando
53  Amor mi spira, noto, e a quel modo
54  ch'e' ditta dentro vo significando.”

55  "O brother, now I see," he said, "the knot
56  Which me, the Notary, and Guittone held
57  Short of the sweet new style that now I hear.

55  “O frate, issa vegg' io,” diss' elli, “il nodo
56  che 'l Notaro e Guittone e me ritenne
57  di qua dal dolce stil novo ch'i' odo!

58  I do perceive full clearly how your pens
59  Go closely following after him who dictates,
60  Which with our own forsooth came not to pass;

58  Io veggio ben come le vostre penne
59  di retro al dittator sen vanno strette,
60  che de le nostre certo non avvenne;

61  And he who sets himself to go beyond,
62  No difference sees from one style to another;"
63  And as if satisfied, he held his peace.

61  e qual più a gradire oltre si mette,
62  non vede più da l'uno a l'altro stilo”;
63  e, quasi contentato, si tacette.

64  Even as the birds, that winter tow'rds the Nile,
65  Sometimes into a phalanx form themselves,
66  Then fly in greater haste, and go in file;

61  e qual più a gradire oltre si mette,
62  non vede più da l'uno a l'altro stilo”;
63  e, quasi contentato, si tacette.

67  In such wise all the people who were there,
68  Turning their faces, hurried on their steps,
69  Both by their leanness and their wishes light.

67  così tutta la gente che lì era,
68  volgendo 'l viso, raffrettò suo passo,
69  e per magrezza e per voler leggera.

70  And as a man, who weary is with trotting,
71  Lets his companions onward go, and walks,
72  Until he vents the panting of his chest;

70  E come l'uom che di trottare è lasso,
71  lascia andar li compagni, e sì passeggia
72   fin che si sfoghi l'affollar del casso,

73  So did Forese let the holy flock
74  Pass by, and came with me behind it, saying,
75  "When will it be that I again shall see thee?"

73  sì lasciò trapassar la santa greggia
74  Forese, e dietro meco sen veniva,
75  dicendo: “Quando fia ch'io ti riveggia?”

76  "How long," I answered, "I may live, I know not;
77  Yet my return will not so speedy be,
78  But I shall sooner in desire arrive;

76  “Non so,” rispuos' io lui, “quant' io mi viva;
77  ma già non fïa il tornar mio tantosto,
78  ch'io non sia col voler prima a la riva;

79  Because the place where I was set to live
80  From day to day of good is more depleted,
81  And unto dismal ruin seems ordained."

79  però che 'l loco u' fui a viver posto,
80  di giorno in giorno più di ben si spolpa,
81  e a trista ruina par disposto.”

82  "Now go," he said, "for him most guilty of it
83  At a beast's tail behold I dragged along
84  Towards the valley where is no repentance.

82  “Or va,” diss' el; “che quei che più n'ha colpa,
83  vegg' ïo a coda d'una bestia tratto
84  inver' la valle ove mai non si scolpa.

85  Faster at every step the beast is going,
86  Increasing evermore until it smites him,
87  And leaves the body vilely mutilated.

85  La bestia ad ogne passo va più ratto,
86  crescendo sempre, fin ch'ella il percuote,
87  e lascia il corpo vilmente disfatto.
88  Not long those wheels shall turn," and he uplifted
89  His eyes to heaven, "ere shall be clear to thee
90  That which my speech no farther can declare.

88  Non hanno molto a volger quelle ruote,”
89 e drizzò li occhi al ciel, “che ti fia chiaro
90  ciò che 'l mio dir più dichiarar non puote.

91  Now stay behind; because the time so precious
92  Is in this kingdom, that I lose too much
93  By coming onward thus abreast with thee."

91  Tu ti rimani omai; ché 'l tempo è caro
92  in questo regno, sì ch'io perdo troppo
93  venendo teco sì a paro a paro.”

94  As sometimes issues forth upon a gallop
95  A cavalier from out a troop that ride,
96  And seeks the honour of the first encounter,

94  Qual esce alcuna volta di gualoppo
95 lo cavalier di schiera che cavalchi,
96 e va per farsi onor del primo intoppo,

97  So he with greater strides departed from us;
98  And on the road remained I with those two,
99  Who were such mighty marshals of the world.

97  tal si partì da noi con maggior valchi;
98  e io rimasi in via con esso i due
99 che fuor del mondo sì gran marescalchi.

100  And when before us he had gone so far
101  Mine eyes became to him such pursuivants
102  As was my understanding to his words,

100  E quando innanzi a noi intrato fue,
101  che li occhi miei si fero a lui seguaci,
102  come la mente a le parole sue,

103  Appeared to me with laden and living boughs
104  Another apple-tree, and not far distant,
105  From having but just then turned thitherward.

103  parvermi i rami gravidi e vivaci
104  d'un altro pomo, e non molto lontani
105  per esser pur allora vòlto in laci.

106  People I saw beneath it lift their hands,
107  And cry I know not what towards the leaves,
108  Like little children eager and deluded,

106  Vidi gente sott' esso alzar le mani
107  e gridar non so che verso le fronde,
108  quasi bramosi fantolini e vani

109  Who pray, and he they pray to doth not answer,
109  But, to make very keen their appetite,
110  Holds their desire aloft, and hides it not.

108  che pregano, e 'l pregato non risponde,
110  ma, per fare esser ben la voglia acuta,
110  tien alto lor disio e nol nasconde.

112  Then they departed as if undeceived;
113  And now we came unto the mighty tree
114  Which prayers and tears so manifold refuses.

112  Poi si partì sì come ricreduta;
113  e noi venimmo al grande arbore adesso,
114  che tanti prieghi e lagrime rifiuta.

115  "Pass farther onward without drawing near;
116  The tree of which Eve ate is higher up,
117  And out of that one has this tree been raised."

115  “Trapassate oltre sanza farvi presso:
116  legno è più sù che fu morso da Eva,
117  e questa pianta si levò da esso.”

118  Thus said I know not who among the branches;
119  Whereat Virgilius, Statius, and myself
120  Went crowding forward on the side that rises.

118  Sì tra le frasche non so chi diceva;
119  per che Virgilio e Stazio e io, ristretti,
120  oltre andavam dal lato che si leva.

121  "Be mindful," said he, "of the accursed ones
122  Formed of the cloud-rack, who inebriate
123  Combated Theseus with their double breasts;

121  “Ricordivi,” dicea, “d'i maladetti
122  nei nuvoli formati, che, satolli,
123  Tesëo combatter co' doppi petti;

124  And of the Jews who showed them soft in drinking,
125  Whence Gideon would not have them for companions
126  When he tow'rds Midian the hills descended."

124  e de li Ebrei ch'al ber si mostrar molli,
125  per che no i volle Gedeon compagni,
126  quando inver' Madïan discese i colli.”

127  Thus, closely pressed to one of the two borders,
128  On passed we, hearing sins of gluttony,
129  Followed forsooth by miserable gains;

127  Sì accostati a l'un d'i due vivagni
128  passammo, udendo colpe de la gola
129  seguite già da miseri guadagni.

130  Then set at large upon the lonely road,
131  A thousand steps and more we onward went,
132  In contemplation, each without a word.

130  Poi, rallargati per la strada sola,
131  ben mille passi e più ci portar oltre,
132  contemplando ciascun sanza parola.

133  "What go ye thinking thus, ye three alone?"
134  Said suddenly a voice, whereat I started
135  As terrified and timid beasts are wont.

133  “Che andate pensando sì voi sol tre?”
134  sùbita voce disse; ond' io mi scossi
135  come fan bestie spaventate e poltre.

136  I raised my head to see who this might be,
137  And never in a furnace was there seen
138  Metals or glass so lucent and so red

136  Drizzai la testa per veder chi fossi;
137  e già mai non si videro in fornace
138  vetri o metalli sì lucenti e rossi,

139  As one I saw who said: "If it may please you
140  To mount aloft, here it behoves you turn;
141  This way goes he who goeth after peace."

139  com'io vidi un che dicea: “S'a voi piace
140  montare in sù, qui si convien dar volta;
141  quinci si va chi vuole andar per pace.”

142  His aspect had bereft me of my sight,
143  So that I turned me back unto my Teachers,
144  Like one who goeth as his hearing guides him.

142  L'aspetto suo m'avea la vista tolta;
143  per ch'io mi volsi dietro a' miei dottori,
144  com' om che va secondo ch'elli ascolta.

145  And as, the harbinger of early dawn,
146  The air of May doth move and breathe out fragrance,
147  Impregnate all with herbage and with flowers,

145  E quale, annunziatrice de li albori,
146  l'aura di maggio movesi e olezza,
147  tutta impregnata da l'erba e da' fiori;

148  So did I feel a breeze strike in the midst
149  My front, and felt the moving of the plumes
150  That breathed around an odour of ambrosia;

148  tal mi senti' un vento dar per mezza
149  la fronte, e ben senti' mover la piuma,
150  che fé sentir d'ambrosïa l'orezza.

151  And heard it said: "Blessed are they whom grace
152  So much illumines, that the love of taste
153  Excites not in their breasts too great desire,

151  E senti' dir: “Beati cui alluma
152  tanto di grazia, che l'amor del gusto
153  nel petto lor troppo disir non fuma,

154  Hungering at all times so far as is just."

154  esurïendo sempre quanto è giusto!”

Canto XXV
The impossible-to-resolve difficulty of prosifying poetry is analogous to what Freud discovered when attempting to analyze a dream, the analyzing prose as it enters the dream or the poem, becomes interminably verbose and incomplete.   The poem, being the product of condensation, displacement, and puns has sequestered within its porous membrane an immensity of times, a plurosity of spaces, and like an atom, contains only the tiniest smatters of matter, organizing and dispersing what, upon any prosaic examination, appears to be nothing but a vacuum.  From these infinitesimal bits of virtually virtual substantialities the poet leaps from one tidbit to another, traversing like smoke the fascinating gaps that constitute the ephemeral body of the poem.  This leaping about from one gravitational field, through antigravitational or amorphous gravitational mysteries, is poetry métier, and because it can express the inexpressible it is the queen of all philosophies, theologies and sciences, the music of language when language explodes from its algebra.  Robert Bly recognized this, and wrote:

The links {i.e., leaps} are not private, but somehow bound to nature.

Thought of in terms of language, then, leaping is the ability to associate fast.  In a great ancient or modern poem, the considerable distance between the associations, the distance the spark has to leap, gives the lines their bottomless feeling, their space, and the speed of the association increases the excitement of the poetry (Leaping Poetry, p.4,).

Any audience of a poem will find themselves in multiple worlds, those consisting of the text, as selected by the poet, according to his own associations, and those consisting of the text as it appears to them, according to their own associations.  Must we add that the more nimble the poet, the more associations, and the subtler the audience, the more those associations proliferate?  Dante's text reaches backward in time to Virgil (and here also to Statius), and then through Virgil to Homer.   Our Dantean text reaches backward in time to Dante, and via Dante to Virgil, and via Virgil to Homer, and all the possible texts cast a light forward to who knows how many readers in how many times and places in the future.  Backward and forward, up and down, are important here, but are not the only way to perceive this text.  One might also say that the associations form a sort of temporal gravity well, in which past and future are swept down to the point of the present, where, looking or reading up from that point, the reader/listener may see the entire panorama of associations, whirling around in kaleidoscopic fashion, each slight shift of perspective bringing a dazzling new configuration, wherein, at the moment when text and text interpreter meet, an entire universe arises from this psychic-Ptolemaic pivot, spinning and transmuting as fast or as slow as the reader/listener's perception and imagination may allow. 

The situation in Canto XXV of the Purgatorio is this: Circling to the right around the conical mountain, Virgil, Statius, and Dante, are speeding up a narrow defile between lust's fires that shoot out of the mountain, and the edge of the abyss, the updraft from below bending the flames back enough to clear a dangerous corridor for their ascent.  The constellation Taurus (stubbornness, persistence) and Scorpio (single-mindedness, ambition) lie 180 degrees opposite one another, one in light, one in night, and from these heavenly wheelings we tell the time.  The threesome hurries, lest the sting (il traffigge) pierce or wound them.  

The narrowness of the gap separates the climbers, Virgil in the lead, and we remember from a previous canto, that his pagan wisdom is a lantern which shines behind him, guiding Statius and Dante on a path obscure to his own soul.  In this single-file manner, cranes, or storks (often confused with one another) fly.  And we remember how in Canto V of the Inferno, the most illustrious of the lechers, fly by in a line, like cranes.  Now we have the simile of Dante, the aspirant and questioner, comparing himself to a fledgling stork, i.e., an infant (that word is important, and we will come back to it) wanting to fly, to understand, but as yet unable or too timid to ask to be fed (remember the gluttonous, and associations conflating eating and speaking, i.e. the recitations of poems.)  Dante opens his mouth, like a baby bird, signaling that he wants to be fed.  Virgil reads this gesture and being referred to as "father" (i.e., provider, feeder), grants Dante permission to speak.  The simile Virgil uses is that of an arrow, when the string of the bow is extended to the full, and the iron tip (a penetrating tip like the Scorpion's sting) is touching the shaft of the bow — Association of speed, time's arrow, a fledgling ready to launch from the nest (lo nido).  Now the mouth opens to eat a substance that has no substance (wisdom) to ask how shades without substance and without the need for physical nourishment, can grow gaunt from lack of eating — their mouths abjuring food, as we know, to feast on prayer, the obesity of their sin thereby blissfully wasting so that they may grow light enough, as Statius has done, and Dante is doing, to fly up the mountain to paradise.  

Now, Statius speaks, because being Christian, his authority exceeds that of pagan Virgil's, not as a poet, but as a soul.  And he precedes his dissertation on gestation with curious stories whereby events may be connected without being linked by substance, or the propinquity of time or space. (Shades of Bell's theorem! acausal causes, we might say!)  The first exemplar is that of the  length of Meleager's life being determined by how long a log brand takes to be consumed by fire (lust, eating).  Statius tells Dante that remembering this tale would make his question seem less sour (taste, mouth, sweetness).  The second exemplar is that of a mirror, wherein an image, or shade, is absolutely subservient to its cause, the substance, through a medium that is neither shade nor substance, the mirror.  The verse here connects guizzo/tremulous and guizza/trembling, just as a mirror connects image-source and image.  Virgil then tells Dante that Statius will speak and heal his (Dante's) wounds, and we are brought back to that Scorpion’s sting, which tells us where we are in time.  All this in the first 30 lines of the canto, leap after leap after leap of metaphors that continually connect the links of the narrative flow.  Here, we might stop, too, in consider how the operations of language itself, its incongruous small-mouth noises, it's scrawled scratchings, translating sound to silence and silence to sound, seems also to be an entity operating in an intermediate state, its effects on the world of substance being non-material, it's meaning and metaphors produced independent of its sounds and scrawls.  What is language?  And more to the point here, What is poetry.  How does it work?  How does it achieve it's effects?  How is it made, and to what purpose?  All of these fundemental questions, curiously enough, lie beyond the power of poetry, or even language, to explain.  All we can say is that it is an art which weaves a web of mystery around it's own sources.

From verse 37 to verse 108 there follows a long dissertation by Statius on physical and psychic embryology, which the modern reader might well be tempted, mistakenly I believe, to skip, as obsolete medieval superstition masking as science.  But recall what was said above about the text speaking in two worlds, the world of the poet's intention, and the world of reader's retention.  What we contemporary readers are called upon to do is not to dismiss, but to transmutate — for Statius' exposition is all about transmutation — the substance of the text, to a new set of images, which fit our world.  This act of transmutation is exactly what our own future readers will hopefully do when they examine our works, our seeming literalness becoming allegorical.  Recall here what Jung did for alchemy turning what seemed to be bad chemistry into deep psychology, for the medieval mind, as we've previously pointed out, was systematic, the soul was always embedded in any material or natural substance, and this is a process of universal mind, our mind as well as the minds of 1st century Statius and Virgil, and the mind of 14th century Dante, and if we look into the tremulous trembling mirror image of Statius' embryology, we will find curious parallels to those ways of knowing which we, too often abandoning the truths of poetry, have come to regard as the observations of science.  For the facts of scientific observation are also transmuted, that is, turned into theory, and these theories are always meta-explanations which attempt to account for the observations, in short, we often use scientific "facts" to support metaphysical positions, and this is what Statius is doing here, and this is neither the fact of substance, nor the image of observations, as the proponents of physics' Copenhagen School have told us, but some curious entangled hybrid, revealed in the deep poetry of their equations.  Reality, whatever it may be, is less like Newtonian billiard balls and more like the protean ephemeralities of language. The curious linkages between the material and the immaterial is what this canto, and also what poetry at its most profound, is all about.

Poetry is the easiest thing in the world to experience, and the hardest thing in the world to understand.  A poem is an immersion and an emergence, not a puzzle.  The conscious prose mind seeks clarity, but instead creates hard edges and impenetrable surfaces.  Real clarity is dazzling, a prismatic mist that becomes more dazzling and finer mist as it is more deeply probed.  Verses 91 -93 in this canto describe this process, the forms of the spirits are as air, full of rain, illuminated by the alien mist of the superconsciousness.  This is the world that has nothing to do with linear time, scholastic grammar, or pagan logic.  On one side of the brain is a world stripped down by so-called waking consciousness to a mere plus or minus seven elements, these elements shelter in connective words like "and," and "now," and "when," and "thus," and "therefore," and "hence," and by this means this last bit of evolution's cerebral experiments ventures into a realm called logic and apparent choice.  But seven is an unbalanced number, it cannot be divided into two, thus one side of the spit will always be dominant.  The conscious mind has the gift of choice, it can create alternative scenarios, and is not merely reflexive, and yet its choices cannot be enacted, only virtually perceived.  That tiny seven has nothing like the power of the unconscious.  It finds that its impotence, its inability to balance itself, its perpetual conflict is a stricture, a ligature that binds, and that binding arranges each infinite image of the unconscious or superconscious into a finite progression called logic, or grammar, which are experienced as sequential time.  This part of the mind attempts to resolve its unending, uneven conflicts by enforcing a deliberate act of limitation.  The clue to resolving this uneven conflict lies in its unevenness, domination and repression, pride and shame, keep oscillating in that perpetual war which Dante describes so well in the Inferno.  The resolution to the finite is the infinite, and just beneath this order of logic with its disorder of moral judgement is poetry, and the dream.  Just beneath this thinnest of veneers is the entire matrix of sensory and conceptual impressions and associations, the actual teeming morass from which the truncating dishonesty of grammatical syntax emerges.  These prose words enforce the conscious waking belief that we perceive things and associate one thing to another in the orderly manner by which those connecting words arrange them.  But let us take those words away, in this case from Statius' long dissertation.  Let us cut the string of syntax that arranges our impressions in single file, just as the poets are ascending in single file, from oldest to youngest, up the purgatorial mountain.  And further, let us dissolve the historical glue that conflates physiology, theology, and philosophy into something like an explanation of the acausal magic of events; i.e. Einstein's "spooky action at a distance," all these trillions and trillions of things operating together as if they were floating in the invisible current which mandated their affinity ... what then do we make of Statius' speech?  Do we not experience it just as we would a poem by Garcia Lorca, by Caesar Vallejo, by Pablo Neruda?  Would we not find affinities between these verses and those of Wallace Stevens in works like Sea Surface Full of Clouds?  Suddenly we are tumbling and swirling about in Dante's verses in a cascade of images, perceptions, concepts: Blood, thirsts, the leavings of a feast, the opalescence of semen, several processes of digestion, by infants (there's that word again, derived from the Latin fari, i.e., one with the potential of speech), the fermentation of sunlight into wine, the bursting of seeds into plants, the contractive pulses of sponges, insanguinated vessels, the animation of the primate animal into a human intellect by a puff of the same Divine Breath, which spoke the world into being with its word, and by which force the clouds above our heads are moved, and the poet's mouth is moved to versify.  And we find death, and the existence of post-mortem poem-bodies, entities as intricate as those composed of physical matter, weird things like reputations comprised not of flesh, bone, nerve, and blood, but of rainbow mists, organized insolubly by intensified affect and belief ... this, this then is the actual realm of Bly's lightning quick associations, the leaping ephemeral qualia which neuroscientists call the "hard problem" of consciousness.  That hard problem is not solved, but it is certainly exposed and expressed by poetry, and in no poetry that I know, is it better expressed than by Dante's.   
         
1  Now was it the ascent no hindrance brooked,
2  Because the sun had his meridian circle
3  To Taurus left, and night to Scorpio;

1  Ora era onde 'l salir non volea storpio;
2  ché 'l sole avëa il cerchio di merigge
3  lasciato al Tauro e la notte a lo Scorpio:

4  Wherefore as doth a man who tarries not,
5  But goes his way, whate'er to him appear,
6  If of necessity the sting transfix him,

4  per che, come fa l'uom che non s'affigge
5  ma vassi a la via sua, che che li appaia,
6  se di bisogno stimolo il trafigge,

7  In this wise did we enter through the gap,
8  Taking the stairway, one before the other,
9  Which by its narrowness divides the climbers.

7  così intrammo noi per la callaia,
8  uno innanzi altro prendendo la scala
9  che per artezza i salitor dispaia.

10  And as the little stork that lifts its wing
11  With a desire to fly, and does not venture
12  To leave the nest, and lets it downward droop,

10  E quale il cicognin che leva l'ala
11  per voglia di volare, e non s'attenta
12  d'abbandonar lo nido, e giù la cala;

13  Even such was I, with the desire of asking
14  Kindled and quenched, unto the motion coming
15  He makes who doth address himself to speak.

13  tal era io con voglia accesa e spenta
14  di dimandar, venendo infino a l'atto
15  che fa colui ch'a dicer s'argomenta.

16  Not for our pace, though rapid it might be,
17  My father sweet forbore, but said: "Let fly
18  The bow of speech thou to the barb hast drawn."

16  Non lasciò, per l'andar che fosse ratto,
17  lo dolce padre mio, ma disse: “Scocca
18  l'arco del dir, che 'nfino al ferro hai tratto.”

19  With confidence I opened then my mouth,
20  And I began: "How can one meagre grow
21  There where the need of nutriment applies not?"

19  Allor sicuramente apri' la bocca
20  e cominciai: “Come si può far magro
21  là dove l'uopo di nodrir non tocca?”

22  "If thou wouldst call to mind how Meleager
23  Was wasted by the wasting of a brand,
24  This would not," said he, "be to thee so sour;

22  “Se t'ammentassi come Meleagro
23  si consumò al consumar d'un stizzo,
24  non fora,” disse, “a te questo sì agro;

25  And wouldst thou think how at each tremulous motion
26  Trembles within a mirror your own image;
27  That which seems hard would mellow seem to thee.

25  e se pensassi come, al vostro guizzo,
26  guizza dentro a lo specchio vostra image,
27  ciò che par duro ti parrebbe vizzo.

28  But that thou mayst content thee in thy wish
29  Lo Statius here; and him I call and pray
30  He now will be the healer of thy wounds."

28  Ma perché dentro a tuo voler t'adage,
29  ecco qui Stazio; e io lui chiamo e prego
30  che sia or sanator de le tue piage.”

31  "If I unfold to him the eternal vengeance,"
32  Responded Statius, "where thou present art,
33  Be my excuse that I can naught deny thee."

31  “Se la veduta etterna li dislego,”
32  rispuose Stazio, “là dove tu sie,
33  discolpi me non potert' io far nego.”

34  Then he began: "Son, if these words of mine
35  Thy mind doth contemplate and doth receive,
36  They'll be thy light unto the How thou sayest.

34  Poi cominciò: “Se le parole mie,
35  figlio, la mente tua guarda e riceve,
36  lume ti fiero al come che tu die.

37  The perfect blood, which never is drunk up
38  Into the thirsty veins, and which remaineth
39  Like food that from the table thou removest,

37  Sangue perfetto, che poi non si beve
37  da l'assetate vene, e si rimane
39  quasi alimento che di mensa leve,

40  Takes in the heart for all the human members
41  Virtue informative, as being that
42  Which to be changed to them goes through the veins

40  prende nel core a tutte membra umane
41  virtute informativa, come quello
42  ch'a farsi quelle per le vene vane.

43  Again digest, descends it where 'tis better
44  Silent to be than say; and then drops thence
45  Upon another's blood in natural vase.

43  Ancor digesto, scende ov' è più bello
44  tacer che dire; e quindi poscia geme
45  sovr' altrui sangue in natural vasello. 

46  There one together with the other mingles,
47  One to be passive meant, the other active
48  By reason of the perfect place it springs from;

46  Ivi s'accoglie l'uno e l'altro insieme,
47  l'un disposto a patire, e l'altro a fare
48  per lo perfetto loco onde si preme;

49  And being conjoined, begins to operate,
50  Coagulating first, then vivifying
51  What for its matter it had made consistent.

49  e, giunto lui, comincia ad operare
50  coagulando prima, e poi avviva
51  ciò che per sua matera fé constare.

52  The active virtue, being made a soul
53  As of a plant, (in so far different,
54  This on the way is, that arrived already,)

52  Anima fatta la virtute attiva
53  qual d'una pianta, in tanto differente,
54  che questa è in via e quella è già a riva,

55  Then works so much, that now it moves and feels
56  Like a sea-fungus, and then undertakes
57  To organize the powers whose seed it is.

55  tanto ovra poi, che già si move e sente,
56  come spungo marino; e indi imprende
57  ad organar le posse ond' è semente.

58  Now, Son, dilates and now distends itself
59  The virtue from the generator's heart,
60  Where nature is intent on all the members.

58  Or si spiega, figliuolo, or si distende
59  la virtù ch'è dal cor del generante,
60  dove natura a tutte membra intende.

61  But how from animal it man becomes
62  Thou dost not see as yet; this is a point
63  Which made a wiser man than thou once err

61  Ma come d'animal divegna fante,
62  non vedi tu ancor: quest' è tal punto,
63  che più savio di te fé già errante,

64  So far, that in his doctrine separate
65  He made the soul from possible intellect,
66  For he no organ saw by this assumed.

64  sì che per sua dottrina fé disgiunto
65  da l'anima il possibile intelletto,
66  perché da lui non vide organo assunto.

67  Open thy breast unto the truth that's coming,
68  And know that, just as soon as in the foetus
69  The articulation of the brain is perfect,

67  Apri a la verità che viene il petto;
68  e sappi che, sì tosto come al feto
68  l'articular del cerebro è perfetto,

70  The primal Motor turns to it well pleased
71  At so great art of nature, and inspires
72  A spirit new with virtue all replete,

70  lo motor primo a lui si volge lieto
71  sovra tant' arte di natura, e spira
72  spirito novo, di vertù repleto,

73  Which what it finds there active doth attract
74  Into its substance, and becomes one soul,
75  Which lives, and feels, and on itself revolves.

73  che ciò che trova attivo quivi, tira
74  in sua sustanzia, e fassi un'alma sola,
75  che vive e sente e sé in sé rigira.

76  And that thou less may wonder at my word,
77  Behold the sun's heat, which becometh wine,
78  Joined to the juice that from the vine distils.

76  E perché meno ammiri la parola,
77  guarda il calor del sol che si fa vino,
78  giunto a l'omor che de la vite cola.

79  Whenever Lachesis has no more thread,
80  It separates from the flesh, and virtually
81  Bears with itself the human and divine;

79  Quando Làchesis non ha più del lino,
80  solvesi da la carne, e in virtute
81  ne porta seco e l'umano e 'l divino:

82  The other faculties are voiceless all;
83  The memory, the intelligence, and the will
84  In action far more vigorous than before.

82  l'altre potenze tutte quante mute;
83  memoria, intelligenza e volontade
84  in atto molto più che prima agute.

85  Without a pause it falleth of itself
86  In marvellous way on one shore or the other;
87  There of its roads it first is cognizant.

85  Sanza restarsi, per sé stessa cade
86  mirabilmente a l'una de le rive;
87  quivi conosce prima le sue strade.

88  Soon as the place there circumscribeth it,
89  The virtue informative rays round about,
90  As, and as much as, in the living members.

88  Tosto che loco lì la circunscrive,
89  la virtù formativa raggia intorno
90  così e quanto ne le membra vive.

91  And even as the air, when full of rain,
92  By alien rays that are therein reflected,
93  With divers colours shows itself adorned,

91  E come l'aere, quand' è ben pïorno,
92  per l'altrui raggio che 'n sé si reflette,
93  di diversi color diventa addorno;

94  So there the neighbouring air doth shape itself
95  Into that form which doth impress upon it
96  Virtually the soul that has stood still.

94  così l'aere vicin quivi si mette
95  e in quella forma ch'è in lui suggella
96  virtüalmente l'alma che ristette;

97  And then in manner of the little flame,
98  Which followeth the fire where'er it shifts,
99  After the spirit followeth its new form.

97  e simigliante poi a la fiammella
98  che segue il foco là 'vunque si muta,
99  segue lo spirto sua forma novella.

100  Since afterwards it takes from this its semblance,
101  It is called shade; and thence it organizes
102  Thereafter every sense, even to the sight.

100  Però che quindi ha poscia sua paruta,
101  è chiamata ombra; e quindi organa poi
102  ciascun sentire infino a la veduta.

103  Thence is it that we speak, and thence we laugh;
104  Thence is it that we form the tears and sighs,
105  That on the mountain thou mayhap hast heard.

103  Quindi parliamo e quindi ridiam noi;
104  quindi facciam le lagrime e ' sospiri
105  che per lo monte aver sentiti puoi.

106  According as impress us our desires
107  And other affections, so the shade is shaped,
108  And this is cause of what thou wonderest at."

106  Secondo che ci affliggono i disiri
107  e li altri affetti, l'ombra si figura;
108  e quest' è la cagion di che tu miri.”

109  And now unto the last of all the circles
110  Had we arrived, and to the right hand turned,
111  And were attentive to another care.

109  E già venuto a l'ultima tortura
110  s'era per noi, e vòlto a la man destra,
111  ed eravamo attenti ad altra cura.

112  There the embankment shoots forth flames of fire,
113  And upward doth the cornice breathe a blast
114  That drives them back, and from itself sequesters.

112  Quivi la ripa fiamma in fuor balestra,
113  e la cornice spira fiato in suso
114  che la reflette e via da lei sequestra;

115  Hence we must needs go on the open side,
116  And one by one; and I did fear the fire
117  On this side, and on that the falling down.

115  ond' ir ne convenia dal lato schiuso
116  ad uno ad uno; e io temëa 'l foco
117  quinci, e quindi temeva cader giuso.

118  My Leader said: "Along this place one ought
119  To keep upon the eyes a tightened rein,
120  Seeing that one so easily might err."

118  Lo duca mio dicea: “Per questo loco
119  si vuol tenere a li occhi stretto il freno,
120  però ch'errar potrebbesi per poco.”

121  "Summae Deus clementiae," in the bosom
122  Of the great burning chanted then I heard,
123  Which made me no less eager to turn round;

121  “Summae Deus clementïae” nel seno
122  al grande ardore allora udi' cantando,
123  che di volger mi fé caler non meno;

124  And spirits saw I walking through the flame;
125  Wherefore I looked, to my own steps and theirs
126  Apportioning my sight from time to time.

124  e vidi spirti per la fiamma andando;
125  per ch'io guardava a loro e a' miei passi,
126  compartendo la vista a quando a quando.

127  After the close which to that hymn is made,
128  Aloud they shouted, "Virum non cognosco;"
129  Then recommenced the hymn with voices low.

127  Appresso il fine ch'a quell' inno fassi,
128  gridavano alto: “Virum non cognosco”;
129  indi ricominciavan l'inno bassi.

130  This also ended, cried they: "To the wood
131  Diana ran, and drove forth Helice
132  Therefrom, who had of Venus felt the poison."

130  Finitolo, anco gridavano: “Al bosco
131  si tenne Diana, ed Elice caccionne
132  che di Venere avea sentito il tòsco.”

133  Then to their song returned they; then the wives
134  They shouted, and the husbands who were chaste.
135  As virtue and the marriage vow imposes.

133  Indi al cantar tornavano; indi donne
134  gridavano e mariti che fuor casti
135  come virtute e matrimonio imponne.

136  And I believe that them this mode suffices,
137  For all the time the fire is burning them;
138  With such care is it needful, and such food,

136  E questo modo credo che lor basti
137  per tutto il tempo che 'l foco li abbruscia:
138  con tal cura conviene e con tai pasti

139  That the last wound of all should be closed up.

139  che la piaga da sezzo si ricuscia.

Canto XXVI
An entire dissertation could easily be written on poetry based upon one or another of the seven deadly sins: 

Poetry based upon pride — patriotic newspaper verse, Kiplingesque  jingoism; 

Poetry based upon envy — the denunciation of other poets who are the poet's betters (more on the reverse of that below, i.e. the denunciation of poor poets being rated better than their betters); 

Poetry based upon wrath — these works are legion, but some of Pound's denunciations of usurers might serve as examples — if he were a worse poet; 

Poetry based upon sloth — greeting card verse by people too lazy to learn their craft, Rod McKuenesque type stuff; 

Poetry based upon avarice, the ekphratic  extravagancies of works like Hypnerotomachia Poliphili, or something like the Bower of Bliss episodes of Spenser's Faerie Queene, 

Poetry based upon gluttony, certain passages in Finnegans Wake in the Ondt and the Gracehoper section for example, or, of course, tons of Rabelais, if read superficially;

and finally 

Poetry based upon lust — one of poetry's main themes, and specific to this canto, one of the main themes of the troubadours, who very often conflated lust and love, or used the camouflage of love to disguise their lust.  

What Dante is arguing for in this and the other cantos dealing with poetry is that poetry should be based on love, the chaste love of a woman, such as Beatrice, who is the manifestation of his own soul, the love of language — specifically the love of one's mother tongue, and the love of God, the organizing power of all matter and morals of the universe.  The Commedia is an example of the kind of poetry that Dante is championing, all other styles of poetry being but parodies of the genuine article.  One should add here, something like the Buddhist example of near poisons.  Remember Virgil's only words at the beginning of this canto:  "Guarda," "be careful" for it is easy to lose your way here, and fall into one or another of these parodies.  Virgil should know, because much of the Aeneid could easily be said to be about pride or wrath, and what Guido Guinizzelli says about poets who are overpraised but, in his estimation, inferior, could easily be said to have been motivated by envy.  I think this last example is important, not because we should fall into the trap of ranking poetry in the manner of good, better, best, or bad, worse, the worst, but because something like taste, or the ability to recognize quality, is independent of fame or popular adulation.  What frees Guido's words from the morass of envy is Guido's humility in pointing out one whom he considered his "better" in Daniel Arnaut, and this attribute of humility, is double-underlined by Dante in praising Guido, and his own "betters" in the art of poetry.  (This bow to his own betters by Dante, is, I find, one of the few places in the entire Commedia where Dante seems to be a bit emotionally disingenuous.  I don't think that Dante felt that anyone, including Virgil, was his own better, and considering his accomplishment, this judgement might not have been based upon pride at all, but simply on what he discerned to be his own accomplishments.  Somewhere Blake said something to the effect that: No man can be a genius and be ignorant of the fact that he is one.) 

If you take this journey with Dante, it's a fool's paradise to think that you can just keep reading the poem, studying the commentary, having insight after insight on the depth of Dante's thinking, the astounding felicity of his technique, and it's so interesting, so wonderful, that you are lulled into thinking that you can just keep on doing what you're doing, in a kind of steady progression, feeling wiser and more confident that you are really make head-way, then, suddenly, a great gap opens in your psyche, and you realize what is really at stake — not just a mortal life, but a soul — your own soul, and you begin to doubt if you're really up to this, you begin to think that generations of men and women who have spent their lives studying and delving into this work haven't really been able to explain what has made them dedicate so much of themselves to even so great a cultural artifact as this is — because they didn't tell you, or couldn't tell you about the despair, the exhilaration — and the doubt — my God, the doubt, the feeling that you're not reaching, and may never reach the real promise of this work, that you have vastly underestimated the costs, the rewards, and your own commitment and capabilities.  Something happens inside of you, a wound that permanently shreds your previous assurance, and you think — this is too much, and I am too little, now I can't stand outside or beyond this poem, and be a mere reader, now I am too far in to get out, and I don't know what I'm doing or where I'm going.  Now I need to feel as Dante felt in the first Canto of the Inferno, when Virgil appeared to him, not as a product of the imagination, but as an autonomous entity born from a timeless psyche that vastly exceeds anything previously imagined as a part of myself.  Now I need Dante's help, or my own Beatrice's numinosity, or, or ... I can't even say it, I can't even imagine what I could say, think, or feel, because it's beyond my capacity to hope or to despair ... and I realize that the whole enterprise is coming apart for me, tearing me apart, and I no longer know what I am doing or why, or how I'm are going to meet what is coming next.

The blue skies are turning white as the afternoon wanes towards evening.  The sun is at your back, throwing your shadow into a wall of flames, and from this wall of flames souls appear like fish which you see through the translucency of waves, and your attention grows to encompass the heights of the sky, where two lines of cranes fly, one migrating north crossing another line flying south, you look down where two lines of ants gleam at your feet, one line streaming in one direction, the other in the opposite, you remember a bestiary telling of ants in India and Ethiopia, they're as big as dogs, they guard hoards of gold, you burn with thirst to know the names of these souls, there is a mention of cold water, you remember those Indian and Ethiopian deserts, souls comes forward to ask if you have as yet been entangled in the net of death, you stop to consider, muted by your rapidly expanding impressions: fire, water, the air of the cranes, the earth of the ants  — all the elements of existence.  Those cranes could not be flying as they are unless time had collapsed the seasons between their migrations — what is happening?  One line of the souls in the fire go in one direction, one line counter-flowing in the other, the one a group of sodomites, homosexuals, the other, is that strange alchemical amalgamation — hermaphrodites — these are heterosexuals who have married within themselves both male and females aspects of the psyche.  The souls shout snatches of phrases, trying to outshout those they are passing, each side attempting to call attention to their having committed the greater sin.  Images of Sodom and Gomorrah, scenes of orgiastic debauchery, of destruction, of a woman turned to a pillar of salt, scenes of peasants whose jaws drop as they enter a great city, scenes of a mighty Roman triumph, the great Caesar catcalled as a queen, and we see him sodomized in the bed of a king he has defeated in battle.  Scenes of moonlight hunts with a bare-breasted goddess, the sound of a prayer to the Blessèd Virgin, terrible scenes of a woman crawling into a hollow wooden cow so that she might be humped by a heaving bull.  The crisscrossing lines of penitents stop for a moment in their opposite flaming currents to greet one another with a chaste fraternal kiss.  And you now recognize your friend, your model as a poet, and like sons who split the battle lines of armies to fall at the feet of the mother they thought was dead, you too would fall at the feet of this dear poet, but the flames prevent you ... and now with your friend you talk of poetry and love, the poetry of love, the poetry springing only from love, although here there are only those bathing in the fires of lust, the scorching agony is something they embrace, because this pain alone clarifies for them what love truly is ... and you realize that all this movement and counter movement, this fire, this poetry, are like the circulation of transmuting and transmutational elements in some kind of retort boiling with an alchemical process meant to clarify your own base soul into that sun of gold, that sun which beats upon your back and hurries you along — and then, stepping forth from the flames, comes the poet who embodied the troubadorian ideal of love as a task, a devotion, an inspiration, for him, love is as concrete as a physical body, with its smells, and hair, and skin, but this love is unattainable in the physical body, so that it grows as an autonomous soul in his own body, and in the body of his work.  This poet, this legend speaks.  He speaks in a language that you know, but which is not your Motherese.  He speaks in the vernacular of the kind of love poetry that has led you here, to this moment, where this poet is asking you, you, who are so overwhelmed and who has come so far, and accomplished so much, but who now feels so humbled by this master's presence.  It is all so impossible, so wondrous, so hyper real, but here he is asking from this fire, whose pain he so relishes, that as you ascend towards what bliss or pain you do not know, to pray for him — for you, whose admiration has always been of him, for you to speak to a greater one on his behalf.  Your friend looks at you in wonder.  Are you really going to heaven?  Then both poets disappear, like fish too exposed by the oppression of air, fading down into those undulating, ululating, circulating flames. 

No matter how histrionic you make this, it is going to seem pale and understated next to the experience.  The body that you have carried all this way, is just too small for this ... you are being hollowed out, you are being expanded past the point of confusion, the membrane of your skin is dissolving, infinity is calling, and you are feeling an exhaustion which requires a more than ordinary sleep.   

1  While on the brink thus one before the other
2  We went upon our way, oft the good Master
3  Said: "Take thou heed! suffice it that I warn thee."

1  Mentre che sì per l'orlo, uno innanzi altro,
2  ce n'andavamo, e spesso il buon maestro
3  diceami: “Guarda: giovi ch'io ti scaltro”;

4  On the right shoulder smote me now the sun,
5  That, raying out, already the whole west
6  Changed from its azure aspect into white.

4  feriami il sole in su l'omero destro,
5  che già, raggiando, tutto l'occidente
6   mutava in bianco aspetto di cilestro;

7  And with my shadow did I make the flame
8  Appear more red; and even to such a sign
9  Shades saw I many, as they went, give heed.

7  e io facea con l'ombra più rovente
8  parer la fiamma; e pur a tanto indizio
9  vidi molt' ombre, andando, poner mente.

10  This was the cause that gave them a beginning
11  To speak of me; and to themselves began they
12  To say: "That seems not a factitious body!"

10  Questa fu la cagion che diede inizio
11  loro a parlar di me; e cominciarsi
12  a dir: “Colui non par corpo fittizio”;

13  Then towards me, as far as they could come,
14  Came certain of them, always with regard
15  Not to step forth where they would not be burned.

13  poi verso me, quanto potëan farsi,
14  certi si fero, sempre con riguardo
15  di non uscir dove non fosser arsi.

16  "O thou who goest, not from being slower
17  But reverent perhaps, behind the others,
18  Answer me, who in thirst and fire am burning.

16  “O tu che vai, non per esser più tardo,
17  ma forse reverente, a li altri dopo,
18  rispondi a me che 'n sete e 'n foco ardo.

19  Nor to me only is thine answer needful;
20  For all of these have greater thirst for it
21  Than for cold water Ethiop or Indian.

19  Né solo a me la tua risposta e uopo;
20  ché tutti questi n'hanno maggior sete
21  che d'acqua fredda Indo o Etïopo.

22  Tell us how is it that thou makest thyself
23  A wall unto the sun, as if thou hadst not
24  Entered as yet into the net of death."

22  Dinne com' è che fai di te parete
23  al sol, pur come tu non fossi ancora
24  di morte intrato dentro da la rete.”

25  Thus one of them addressed me, and I straight
26  Should have revealed myself, were I not bent
27  On other novelty that then appeared.

25  Sì mi parlava un d'essi; e io mi fora
26  già manifesto, s'io non fossi atteso
27  ad altra novità ch'apparve allora;

28  For through the middle of the burning road
29  There came a people face to face with these,
30  Which held me in suspense with gazing at them.

28  ché per lo mezzo del cammino acceso
29  venne gente col viso incontro a questa,
30  la qual mi fece a rimirar sospeso.

31  There see I hastening upon either side
32  Each of the shades, and kissing one another
33  Without a pause, content with brief salute.

31  Lì veggio d'ogne parte farsi presta
32  ciascun' ombra e basciarsi una con una
33  sanza restar, contente a brieve festa;

34  Thus in the middle of their brown battalions
35  Muzzle to muzzle one ant meets another
36  Perchance to spy their journey or their fortune.

34  così per entro loro schiera bruna
35  s'ammusa l'una con l'altra formica,
36  forse a spïar lor via e lor fortuna.

37  No sooner is the friendly greeting ended,
38  Or ever the first footstep passes onward,
39  Each one endeavours to outcry the other;

37  Tosto che parton l'accoglienza amica,
38  prima che 'l primo passo lì trascorra,
39  sopragridar ciascuna s'affatica:

40  The new-come people: "Sodom and Gomorrah!"
41  The rest: "Into the cow Pasiphae enters,
42  So that the bull unto her lust may run!"

40  a nova gente: “Soddoma e Gomorra”;
41  e l'altra: “Ne la vacca entra Pasife,
42  perché 'l torello a sua lussuria corra.”

43  Then as the cranes, that to Riphaean mountains
44  Might fly in part, and part towards the sands,
45  These of the frost, those of the sun avoidant,

43  Poi, come grue ch'a le montagne Rife
44 volasser parte, e parte inver' l'arene,
45  queste del gel, quelle del sole schife,

46  One folk is going, and the other coming,
47  And weeping they return to their first songs,
48  And to the cry that most befitteth them;

46  l'una gente sen va, l'altra sen vene;
47  e tornan, lagrimando, a' primi canti
48  e al gridar che più lor si convene;

49  And close to me approached, even as before,
50  The very same who had entreated me,
51  Attent to listen in their countenance.

49  e raccostansi a me, come davanti,
50  essi medesmi che m'avean pregato,
51 attenti ad ascoltar ne' lor sembianti.

52  I, who their inclination twice had seen,
53  Began: "O souls secure in the possession,
54  Whene'er it may be, of a state of peace,

52  Io, che due volte avea visto lor grato,
53  incominciai: “O anime sicure
54  d'aver, quando che sia, di pace stato,

55  Neither unripe nor ripened have remained
56  My members upon earth, but here are with me
57  With their own blood and their articulations.

55  non son rimase acerbe né mature
56  le membra mie di là, ma son qui meco
57  col sangue suo e con le sue giunture.

58  I go up here to be no longer blind;
59  A Lady is above, who wins this grace,
60  Whereby the mortal through your world I bring.

58  Quinci sù vo per non esser più cieco;
59  donna è di sopra che m'acquista grazia,
60  per che 'l mortal per vostro mondo reco.

61  But as your greatest longing satisfied
62  May soon become, so that the Heaven may house you
63  Which full of love is, and most amply spreads,

61  Ma se la vostra maggior voglia sazia
62  tosto divegna, sì che 'l ciel v'alberghi
63  ch'è pien d'amore e più ampio si spazia,

64  Tell me, that I again in books may write it,
65  Who are you, and what is that multitude
66  Which goes upon its way behind your backs?"

64  ditemi, acciò ch'ancor carte ne verghi,
65 chi siete voi, e chi è quella turba
66 che se ne va di retro a' vostri terghi.”

67  Not otherwise with wonder is bewildered
68  The mountaineer, and staring round is dumb,
69  When rough and rustic to the town he goes,

67  Non altrimenti stupido si turba
68  lo montanaro, e rimirando ammuta,
69  quando rozzo e salvatico s'inurba,

70  Than every shade became in its appearance;
71  But when they of their stupor were disburdened,
72  Which in high hearts is quickly quieted,

70  che ciascun' ombra fece in sua paruta;
71  ma poi che furon di stupore scarche,
72  lo qual ne li alti cuor tosto s'attuta,

73  "Blessed be thou, who of our border-lands,"
74  He recommenced who first had questioned us,
75  "Experience freightest for a better life.

73  “Beato te, che de le nostre marche,”
74  ricominciò colei che pria m'inchiese,
75  “per morir meglio, esperienza imbarche!

76  The folk that comes not with us have offended
77  In that for which once Caesar, triumphing,
78  Heard himself called in contumely, 'Queen.'

76  La gente che non vien con noi, offese
77 di ciò per che già Cesar, trïunfando,
78  'Regina' contra sé chiamar s'intese:

79  Therefore they separate, exclaiming, 'Sodom!'
80  Themselves reproving, even as thou hast heard,
81  And add unto their burning by their shame.

79  però si parton 'Soddoma' gridando,
80  rimproverando a sé com' hai udito,
81  e aiutan l'arsura vergognando.

82  Our own transgression was hermaphrodite;
83  But because we observed not human law,
84  Following like unto beasts our appetite,

82  Nostro peccato fu ermafrodito;
83  ma perché non servammo umana legge,
84  seguendo come bestie l'appetito,

85  In our opprobrium by us is read,
86  When we part company, the name of her
87  Who bestialized herself in bestial wood.

85  in obbrobrio di noi, per noi si legge,
86  quando partinci, il nome di colei
87  che s'imbestiò ne le 'mbestiate schegge.

88  Now knowest thou our acts, and what our crime was;
89  Wouldst thou perchance by name know who we are,
90  There is not time to tell, nor could I do it.

88  Or sai nostri atti e di che fummo rei:
89  se forse a nome vuo' saper chi semo,
90  tempo non è di dire, e non saprei.

91  Thy wish to know me shall in sooth be granted;
92  I'm Guido Guinicelli, and now purge me,
93  Having repented ere the hour extreme."

91  Farotti ben di me volere scemo:
92  son Guido Guinizzelli, e già mi purgo
93  per ben dolermi prima ch'a lo stremo.”

94  The same that in the sadness of Lycurgus
95  Two sons became, their mother re-beholding,
96  Such I became, but rise not to such height,

94  Quali ne la tristizia di Ligurgo
95  si fer due figli a riveder la madre,
96  tal mi fec' io, ma non a tanto insurgo,

97  The moment I heard name himself the father
98  Of me and of my betters, who had ever
99  Practised the sweet and gracious rhymes of love;

97  quand' io odo nomar sé stesso il padre
98  mio e de li altri miei miglior che mai
99  rime d'amor usar dolci e leggiadre; 

100  And without speech and hearing thoughtfully
101  For a long time I went, beholding him,
102  Nor for the fire did I approach him nearer.

100  e sanza udire e dir pensoso andai
101  lunga fïata rimirando lui,
102  né, per lo foco, in là più m'appressai.

103  When I was fed with looking, utterly
104  Myself I offered ready for his service,
105  With affirmation that compels belief.

103  Poi che di riguardar pasciuto fui,
104  tutto m'offersi pronto al suo servigio
105  con l'affermar che fa credere altrui.

106  And he to me: "Thou leavest footprints such
107  In me, from what I hear, and so distinct,
108  Lethe cannot efface them, nor make dim.

106  Ed elli a me: “Tu lasci tal vestigio,
107  per quel ch'i' odo, in me, e tanto chiaro,
108  che Letè nol può tòrre né far bigio.

109  But if thy words just now the truth have sworn,
110  Tell me what is the cause why thou displayest
111  In word and look that dear thou holdest me?"

109  Ma se le tue parole or ver giuraro,
110  dimmi che è cagion per che dimostri
111  nel dire e nel guardar d'avermi caro.”

112  And I to him: "Those dulcet lays of yours
113  Which, long as shall endure our modern fashion,
114  Shall make for ever dear their very ink!"

112  E io a lui: “Li dolci detti vostri,
113  che, quanto durerà l'uso moderno,
114  faranno cari ancora i loro incostri.”

105  "O brother," said he, "he whom I point out,"
106  And here he pointed at a spirit in front,
107  "Was of the mother tongue a better smith.

115  “O frate,” disse, “questi ch'io ti cerno
116  col dito,” e additò un spirto innanzi,
117  “fu miglior fabbro del parlar materno.

118  Verses of love and proses of romance,
119  He mastered all; and let the idiots talk,
120  Who think the Lemosin surpasses him.

118  Versi d'amore e prose di romanzi
119  soverchiò tutti; e lascia dir li stolti
120  che quel di Lemosì credon ch'avanzi.

121  To clamour more than truth they turn their faces,
122  And in this way establish their opinion,
123  Ere art or reason has by them been heard.

121  A voce più ch'al ver drizzan li volti,
122  e così ferman sua oppinïone
123  prima ch'arte o ragion per lor s'ascolti.

124  Thus many ancients with Guittone did,
125  From cry to cry still giving him applause,
126  Until the truth has conquered with most persons.

124  Così fer molti antichi di Guittone,
125  di grido in grido pur lui dando pregio,
126  fin che l'ha vinto il ver con più persone.

127  Now, if thou hast such ample privilege
128  'Tis granted thee to go unto the cloister
129  Wherein is Christ the abbot of the college,

127  Or se tu hai sì ampio privilegio,
128  che licito ti sia l'andare al chiostro
129  nel quale è Cristo abate del collegio,

130  To him repeat for me a Paternoster,
131  So far as needful to us of this world,
132  Where power of sinning is no longer ours."

130  falli per me un dir d'un paternostro,
130  quanto bisogna a noi di questo mondo,
132  dove poter peccar non è più nostro.”

133  Then, to give place perchance to one behind,
134  Whom he had near, he vanished in the fire
135  As fish in water going to the bottom.

133  Poi, forse per dar luogo altrui secondo
134  che presso avea, disparve per lo foco,
135  come per l'acqua il pesce andando al fondo.

136  I moved a little tow'rds him pointed out,
137 And said that to his name my own desire
138  An honourable place was making ready.

136  Io mi fei al mostrato innanzi un poco,
137  e dissi ch'al suo nome il mio disire
138  apparecchiava grazïoso loco.

139  He of his own free will began to say:
140  'Tan m' abellis vostre cortes deman,
         *So pleases me your courteous demand,        
141  Que jeu nom' puesc ni vueill a vos cobrire;
         *  I cannot and I will not hide me from you.


142  Jeu sui Arnaut, que plor e vai chantan;
        * I am Arnaut, who weep and singing go;
143  Consiros vei la passada folor,
        * Contrite I see the folly of the past,
144  E vei jauzen lo jorn qu' esper denan.
         * And joyous see the hoped-for day before me.

142  Ieu sui Arnaut, que plor e vau cantan;
143  consiros vei la passada folor,
144  e vei jausen lo joi qu'esper, denan.

145  Ara vus prec per aquella valor,
       *Therefore do I implore you, by that power
146  Que vus condus al som de la scalina
       *Which guides you to the summit of the stairs,
147  Sovenga vus a temprar ma dolor.'
       *Be mindful to assuage my suffering!

145  Ara vos prec, per aquella valor
146  que vos guida al som de l'escalina,
147  sovenha vos a temps de ma dolor!”

148  Then hid him in the fire that purifies them.

148  Poi s'ascose nel foco che li affina.

Canto XXVII
We have seen so much, we have forgotten how to see.  We have heard so much, we have forgotten how to listen.  And we have felt so much, that we are inured against any depth of feeling.  And worse, perhaps of all, we have read so much, we are no longer moved by what we read, and instead, poetry, which should be an exaltation of the body's and the spirit's sensitivities becomes an analgesic against life, and life's deeper joys and pains.  We begin to live our lives between the oscillating poles of duties and distractions, and as such, we reach what Schopenhauer discovered as the ultimate existential despair.  Is life, when it is finally stripped of all of its self-delusions, worth its costs?  Do we find ourselves living when at bottom we really don't want to be alive?  As we proceed on this journey of the Commedia, revitalizing our attention, restoring our ability to attend, whatever sensitivities we had systematically anesthetized, Dante's text has systematically reified.  Essentially Dante awakens to the depth of his despair, and from what he had perceived as the lowest point of his anguish, he finds that he has only found a false-floor, and with a split-off portion of his psyche — his historical and poetic psyche — he finds the courage to break through, and go down.  Up to this point in the poem there has been a continuity centered around the gravity of pain, the human ability, not only to endure the ordinary pain that comes with the possession of a vulnerable, mortal body, but the human capacity to magnify that pain, and to force it on others, the human depravity of even feeling triumphant in its virtuosity in producing ever more excruciating forms of pain.  The gigantic moral dilemma that seethes throughout Hell and Purgatory: Is why does pain arise?  How can pain have a purpose?  How can a cosmos so fully saturated with pain be in its most fundamental aspects, an expression of love?  What those duties and distractions were all about is avoiding a confrontation with this terrifying dilemma.  Oddly, this is a dilemma that Dante's guide, Virgil, really does not address.  Virgil's guidance, his knowledge, seems to fulfill only one purpose: To give his charge the courage to face this Why-Pain? issue, an issue that he himself — although certainly he has dealt with pain, but not the "why" of it — has never and will never face.  If we are reading Dante for some kind of Virgilian erudition, or out of a sense of duty or a need for diversion, we have profoundly missed the point.

A drop of Christ's blood falls from the place of the skull in that center which is Jerusalem, it feeds the rivers of the earth under the sign of Libra.  Those rivers are time, incarnated time, and they flow with Justice.  Time, like space, is everywhere all at once, although its appearance manifest differently according to where you are from its center.  In the center, it is midnight, where the poet protagonists are, it is sunset, Justice has been achieved, the scales balanced, all sins punished or purged, and henceforth the very idea of Justice is moot, for without injustice Justice has no meaning.  A wall of fire confronts us, and from beyond that wall comes of the voice of an Angel of God, a voice more alive than that of the living, he chants Blessed is the World's heart ...  Beati mundo corde! and he tells you that to proceed you must pass through this wall of flame.  Agony will ignite you, but you must not be deaf the beckoning voice sounding beyond the flame, that voice is your beacon and your assurance.  So, the poet tells us, listen.  Listen.  Listen to that voice calling beyond the fires of mortality, beyond incarnation.  And although you inhabit a body which may suffer, as Christ suffered, all the pains of incarnation, that voice is your Alpha and Omega, it is your "In the beginning was the Word ... "  Does the poet, aspirant feel joy at that news.  No.  He does not.  He feels as one who has been put in the pit, the pit of hell, his mortal body's grave.  There is a scene at the beginning of Ingmar Bergman's great film Persona, in which the actor, both an actor in the film, and an actor playing the character of an actor, sees on a television screen a Buddhist Monk in Saigon deliberately burning himself to death as an act of peace, and a protest against the war.  We see his body, continuing to sit in meditation, darkening in the center of the flames, one hand raised, and so much of that body is destroyed that it topples.  The actress in her hospital room recoils in horror.  Is the world a stage and all its people players?  If so, it is quite a terrible thing to be on this stage, and to play your part.  In the film the actress is silent, she becomes a listener, an audience for those who continue to live, to play their parts, and to suffer.  This is the Dante's and his readers position.  He vividly imagines burning bodies.  He's seen this before.  Smelled it too, no doubt,  and he recoils.  No matter how far he's come, no matter what trials he's endured to arrive her at this final ascent to the summit of all purgation, he freezes in terror and can go no farther, all his previous trials and triumphs waisted, this wall of flame negating them all.   Here, the theology of the journey, the moral judgements, have changed into aesthetics, and it is poets, poetry, that turn to him, note that, for he is not the manufacturer of his own grace, his own inspiration, they turn to him and tell him the truth of his situation.  He may suffer the most horrible pangs of pain, but nothing of his body can be destroyed.  What a curious statement to all us readers who live in mortal bodies, who firmly believe that we have no life beyond the body, and who, at all costs, feel all evolution's mandates, to preserve, not only that body's life, but also its freedom from pain.  Bentham even so far that the morality of all of your life's choices rests upon this one precept: Avoid pain.  And now we are asked to willingly go through the worst pain imaginable for the sake of what?  The song beyond.  Here, reason performs its last service, the logos of logic is about to be transferred to the logos of the heart, but this final surrender, this submission, although the most difficult and trusted and right of all the decisions it has made before, must be irrational, it must be to embrace its own body's pain, and the destruction of that mortal body's greatest human attribute, its power to reason: to foresee, and to act from what it knows, to enter the unknow.  In short, its ability to master the  vicissitudes of Time.  Virgil's last appeal is to memory: Recorditi!  Recorditi!, he calls twice, and that twice is structurally important, but this appeal fails.  Next he exhorts Dante by reminding him the Beatrice awaits him beyond these flame, and Dante remembers, recollects himself, his sacrifice — in the divine sense — his sacred act which will abnegate his little self merge with his great Self, and the image of one who in his dying act, lifts his eyes to his beloved.  So now the transfer of logic to heart is complete.  In the pagan world, Pyrramus dies looking on his beloved Thisbe, when he is called, by the sound of her name.  There is no Christian exemplar here, as there have been in the Canto's before, because Dante is that exemplar.  He goes through the flames, one poet, the pagan, to guide, and one poet the Christian, to prevent his retreat.  A voice from the other side, chants, Come, blessed of the Father, and they go through, as the sun sets, night falls, and true to what we have learned before of Purgatory, no further movement is possible in the dark, light and the motive power being one.  They sleep on the cliff, like mountain goats, and Dante imagines himself both sheep and goat of the last days protected by his two shepherds.  His sleep is safe, even from the law of gravity.  The poet dreams.  He dreams of two ladies.  Leah, who is weaving her self a garland, and Racheal who never leaves her mirror, action and sight, both wedded to the fire of love, Self-love first, a love for the beauty of that soul within us which always embodies love, sees it with her eyes, honors it with her hands.  They are satisfied.  The sacrifice of pain, of love's pain, and all the memories of loves unsatisfied desires, has fulfilled its purpose, and I might add, it's illusory purpose.  The dream shows Dante a preview of the new world that awaits him: A world of beauty and fulfillment.  When he awakes it is dawn.  The world of crime and retribution, sin and purging is past, and so is the need of Virgil’s guidance, hence forth the purified will may choose what gives it pleasure, all other criteria of choice, but deviations from the beautiful and divine.  The head is golden and crowned with both practical and moral mastery of itself, and the heart assumes it's reign.    

1  As when he vibrates forth his earliest rays,
2  In regions where his Maker shed his blood,
3  (The Ebro falling under lofty Libra,

1  Sì come quando i primi raggi vibra
2  là dove il suo fattor lo sangue sparse,
3  cadendo Ibero sotto l'alta Libra,

4  And waters in the Ganges burnt with noon,)
5  So stood the Sun; hence was the day departing,
6  When the glad Angel of God appeared to us.

4  e l'onde in Gange da nona rïarse,
5  sì stava il sole; onde 'l giorno sen giva,
6  come l'angel di Dio lieto ci apparse.

7  Outside the flame he stood upon the verge,
8  And chanted forth, "Beati mundo corde,"
9  In voice by far more living than our own.

7  Fuor de la fiamma stava in su la riva,
8  e cantava “Beati mundo corde!”
9  in voce assai più che la nostra viva.

10  Then: "No one farther goes, souls sanctified,
11  If first the fire bite not; within it enter,
12  And be not deaf unto the song beyond."

10  Poscia “Più non si va, se pria non morde,
11  anime sante, il foco: intrate in esso,
12  e al cantar di là non siate sorde,”

13  When we were close beside him thus he said;
14  Wherefore e'en such became I, when I heard him,
15  As he is who is put into the grave.

13  ci disse come noi li fummo presso;
14  per ch'io divenni tal, quando lo 'ntesi,
15  qual è colui che ne la fossa è messo.

16  Upon my clasped hands I straightened me,
17  Scanning the fire, and vividly recalling
18  The human bodies I had once seen burned.

16  In su le man commesse mi protesi,
17  guardando il foco e imaginando forte
18  umani corpi già veduti accesi.

19  Towards me turned themselves my good Conductors,
20  And unto me Virgilius said: "My son,
21  Here may indeed be torment, but not death.

19  Volsersi verso me le buone scorte;
20  e Virgilio mi disse: “Figliuol mio,
21  qui può esser tormento, ma non morte.

22  Remember thee, remember! and if I
23  On Geryon have safely guided thee,
24  What shall I do now I am nearer God?

22  Ricorditi, ricorditi! E se io
23  sovresso Gerïon ti guidai salvo,
24  che farò ora presso più a Dio?

25  Believe for certain, shouldst thou stand a full
26  Millennium in the bosom of this flame,
27  It could not make thee bald a single hair.

25  Credi per certo che se dentro a l'alvo
26  di questa fiamma stessi ben mille anni,
27  non ti potrebbe far d'un capel calvo.

28  And if perchance thou think that I deceive thee,
29  Draw near to it, and put it to the proof
30  With thine own hands upon thy garment's hem.

28  E se tu forse credi ch'io t'inganni,
29  fatti ver' lei, e fatti far credenza
30  con le tue mani al lembo d'i tuoi panni.

31  Now lay aside, now lay aside all fear,
32  Turn hitherward, and onward come securely;"
33  And I still motionless, and 'gainst my conscience!

31  Pon giù omai, pon giù ogne temenza;
32  volgiti in qua e vieni: entra sicuro!”
33  E io pur fermo e contra coscïenza.

34  Seeing me stand still motionless and stubborn,
35  Somewhat disturbed he said: "Now look thou, Son,
36  'Twixt Beatrice and thee there is this wall."

34  Quando mi vide star pur fermo e duro,
35  turbato un poco disse: “Or vedi, figlio:
36  tra Bëatrice e te è questo muro.”

37  As at the name of Thisbe oped his lids
38  The dying Pyramus, and gazed upon her,
39  What time the mulberry became vermilion,

37  Come al nome di Tisbe aperse il ciglio
38  Piramo in su la morte, e riguardolla,
39  allor che 'l gelso diventò vermiglio;

40  Even thus, my obduracy being softened,
41  I turned to my wise Guide, hearing the name
42  That in my memory evermore is welling.

40  così, la mia durezza fatta solla,
41  mi volsi al savio duca, udendo il nome
42  che ne la mente sempre mi rampolla.

43  Whereat he wagged his head, and said: "How now?
44  Shall we stay on this side?" then smiled as one
45  Does at a child who's vanquished by an apple.

43  Ond' ei crollò la fronte e disse: “Come!
44  volenci star di qua?”; indi sorrise
45  come al fanciul si fa ch'è vinto al pome.

46  Then into the fire in front of me he entered,
47  Beseeching Statius to come after me,
48  Who a long way before divided us.

46  Poi dentro al foco innanzi mi si mise,
47  pregando Stazio che venisse retro,
48  che pria per lunga strada ci divise.

49  When I was in it, into molten glass
50  I would have cast me to refresh myself,
51  So without measure was the burning there!

49  Sì com' fui dentro, in un bogliente vetro
50  gittato mi sarei per rinfrescarmi,
51  tant' era ivi lo 'ncendio sanza metro.

52  And my sweet Father, to encourage me,
53  Discoursing still of Beatrice went on,
54  Saying: "Her eyes I seem to see already!"

52  Lo dolce padre mio, per confortarmi,
53  pur di Beatrice ragionando andava,
54  dicendo: “Li occhi suoi già veder parmi.”

55  A voice, that on the other side was singing,
56  Directed us, and we, attent alone
57  On that, came forth where the ascent began.

55  Guidavaci una voce che cantava
56  di là; e noi, attenti pur a lei,
57  venimmo fuor là ove si montava.

58  "Venite, benedicti Patris mei,"
59  Sounded within a splendour, which was there
60  Such it o'ercame me, and I could not look.

58  “Venite, benedicti Patris mei,”
59  sonò dentro a un lume che lì era,
60  tal che mi vinse e guardar nol potei.

61  "The sun departs," it added, "and night cometh;
62  Tarry ye not, but onward urge your steps,
63  So long as yet the west becomes not dark."

61  “Lo sol sen va,” soggiunse, “e vien la sera;
62  non v'arrestate, ma studiate il passo,
63  mentre che l'occidente non si annera.”

64  Straight forward through the rock the path ascended
65  In such a way that I cut off the rays
66  Before me of the sun, that now was low.

64  Dritta salia la via per entro 'l sasso
65  verso tal parte ch'io toglieva i raggi
66  dinanzi a me del sol ch'era già basso.

67  And of few stairs we yet had made assay,
68  Ere by the vanished shadow the sun's setting
69  Behind us we perceived, I and my Sages.

67  E di pochi scaglion levammo i saggi,
68  che 'l sol corcar, per l'ombra che si spense,
69  sentimmo dietro e io e li miei saggi. 

70  And ere in all its parts immeasurable
71  The horizon of one aspect had become,
72  And Night her boundless dispensation held,

70  E pria che 'n tutte le sue parti immense
71  fosse orizzonte fatto d'uno aspetto,
72  e notte avesse tutte sue dispense

73  Each of us of a stair had made his bed;
74  Because the nature of the mount took from us
75  The power of climbing, more than the delight.

73  ciascun di noi d'un grado fece letto;
74  ché la natura del monte ci affranse
75  la possa del salir più e 'l diletto.

76  Even as in ruminating passive grow
77  The goats, who have been swift and venturesome
78  Upon the mountain-tops ere they were fed,

76  Quali si stanno ruminando manse
77  le capre, state rapide e proterve
78   sovra le cime avante che sien pranse,

79  Hushed in the shadow, while the sun is hot,
80  Watched by the herdsman, who upon his staff
81  Is leaning, and in leaning tendeth them;

79  tacite a l'ombra, mentre che 'l sol ferve,
80  guardate dal pastor, che 'n su la verga
81  poggiato s'è e lor di posa serve;

82  And as the shepherd, lodging out of doors,
83  Passes the night beside his quiet flock,
84  Watching that no wild beast may scatter it,

82  e quale il mandrïan che fori alberga,
82  lungo il pecuglio suo queto pernotta,
83  guardando perché fiera non lo sperga;

85  Such at that hour were we, all three of us,
86  I like the goat, and like the herdsmen they,
87  Begirt on this side and on that by rocks.

85  tali eravamo tutti e tre allotta,
86  io come capra, ed ei come pastori,
87  fasciati quinci e quindi d'alta grotta.

88  Little could there be seen of things without;
89  But through that little I beheld the stars
90  More luminous and larger than their wont.

88  Poco parer potea lì del di fori;
89  ma, per quel poco, vedea io le stelle
90  di lor solere e più chiare e maggiori.

91  Thus ruminating, and beholding these,
92  Sleep seized upon me,—sleep, that oftentimes
93  Before a deed is done has tidings of it.

91  Sì ruminando e sì mirando in quelle,
92  mi prese il sonno; il sonno che sovente,
93  anzi che 'l fatto sia, sa le novelle.

94  It was the hour, I think, when from the East
95  First on the mountain Citherea beamed,
96  Who with the fire of love seems always burning;

94  Ne l'ora, credo, che de l'orïente
95  prima raggiò nel monte Citerea,
96  che di foco d'amor par sempre ardente,

97  Youthful and beautiful in dreams methought
98  I saw a lady walking in a meadow,
99  Gathering flowers; and singing she was saying:

97  giovane e bella in sogno mi parea
98  donna vedere andar per una landa
99  cogliendo fiori; e cantando dicea:

100  "Know whosoever may my name demand
101  That I am Leah, and go moving round
102  My beauteous hands to make myself a garland.

100  “Sappia qualunque il mio nome dimanda
101  ch'i' mi son Lia, e vo movendo intorno
102  le belle mani a farmi una ghirlanda.

103  To please me at the mirror, here I deck me,
104  But never does my sister Rachel leave
105  Her looking-glass, and sitteth all day long.

103  Per piacermi a lo specchio, qui m'addorno;
104  ma mia suora Rachel mai non si smaga
105  dal suo miraglio, e siede tutto giorno.

106  To see her beauteous eyes as eager is she,
107  As I am to adorn me with my hands;
108  Her, seeing, and me, doing satisfies."

106  Ell' è d'i suoi belli occhi veder vaga
107  com' io de l'addornarmi con le mani;
108  lei lo vedere, e me l'ovrare appaga.”

109  And now before the antelucan splendours
110  That unto pilgrims the more grateful rise,
111  As, home-returning, less remote they lodge,

109  E già per li splendori antelucani,
110  che tanto a' pellegrin surgon più grati,
111  quanto, tornando, albergan men lontani,

112  The darkness fled away on every side,
113  And slumber with it; whereupon I rose,
114  Seeing already the great Masters risen.

112  le tenebre fuggian da tutti lati,
113  e 'l sonno mio con esse; ond' io leva'mi,
114  veggendo i gran maestri già levati.

115  "That apple sweet, which through so many branches
116  The care of mortals goeth in pursuit of,
117  To-day shall put in peace thy hungerings."

115  “Quel dolce pome che per tanti rami
116  cercando va la cura de' mortali,
117  oggi porrà in pace le tue fami.”

118  Speaking to me, Virgilius of such words
119  As these made use; and never were there guerdons
120  That could in pleasantness compare with these.

118  Virgilio inverso me queste cotali
119  parole usò; e mai non furo strenne
120  che fosser di piacere a queste iguali.

121  Such longing upon longing came upon me
122  To be above, that at each step thereafter
123  For flight I felt in me the pinions growing.

121  Tanto voler sopra voler mi venne
122  de l'esser sù, ch'ad ogne passo poi
123  al volo mi sentia crescer le penne.

124  When underneath us was the stairway all
125  Run o'er, and we were on the highest step,
126  Virgilius fastened upon me his eyes,

124  Come la scala tutta sotto noi
125  fu corsa e fummo in su 'l grado superno,
126  in me ficcò Virgilio li occhi suoi,

127  And said: "The temporal fire and the eternal,
128  Son, thou hast seen, and to a place art come
129  Where of myself no farther I discern.

127  e disse: “Il temporal foco e l'etterno
128  veduto hai, figlio; e se' venuto in parte
129  dov' io per me più oltre non discerno.

130  By intellect and art I here have brought thee;
131  Take thine own pleasure for thy guide henceforth;
132  Beyond the steep ways and the narrow art thou.

130  Tratto t'ho qui con ingegno e con arte;
131  lo tuo piacere omai prendi per duce;
132  fuor se' de l'erte vie, fuor se' de l'arte.

133  Behold the sun, that shines upon thy forehead;
134  Behold the grass, the flowerets, and the shrubs
135  Which of itself alone this land produces.

133  Vedi lo sol che 'n fronte ti riluce;
134  vedi l'erbette, i fiori e li arbuscelli
135  che qui la terra sol da sé produce.

136  Until rejoicing come the beauteous eyes
137  Which weeping caused me to come unto thee,
138  Thou canst sit down, and thou canst walk among them.

136  Mentre che vegnan lieti li occhi belli
137  che, lagrimando, a te venir mi fenno,
138  seder ti puoi e puoi andar tra elli.

139  Non aspettar mio dir più né mio cenno;
140  libero, dritto e sano è tuo arbitrio,
141  e fallo fora non fare a suo senno:

139  Expect no more or word or sign from me;
140  Free and upright and sound is thy free-will,
141  And error were it not to do its bidding;

142  Thee o'er thyself I therefore crown and mitre!"

142  per ch'io te sovra te corono e mitrio.”

Canto XXVIII
In Homo sapiens long evolutionary climb from tree shrew to civilization, in spite of terror and hunger, there must be in all of us a nostalgia for the wild animal we once were, times when the belly was full and food plentiful, when all sexual appetites were quelled by satiation, and no dangers were immediately present, times when we simply were at home in the nature from which we arose, one with that green world, and with our family, our clan, our mate, times when we were at ease, with nothing to do but be in the lap of an enveloping and friendly place, which was so familiar, that it was almost indistinguishable from our own bodies.  Dante, the aspirant, has done the impossible, step by arduous step, he has felt all pains, seen all sins, and walked through a wall of fire to arrive here, in a primeval forest, where all hurry is stilled by wonder.  He is home.  The exile and the nomad has come home.  Now that there is no place to be other than where he is, like those Buddhists doing their walking meditation, or those medieval Christians walking the labyrinths laid out on the pavings of their church floors, he walks slowly, and imbibes this place wherein with each step the ground releases a burgeoning perfume.  Here it is perpetually morning, perpetually spring, and yet the environment is so rich and dense, so gratifying to the senses, that there is no possibility of any Schopenhauerian boredom or staleness.  This variety is without the changes that comes from the arc of mortality which is always developing from seed to maturity and then declining and disintegrating toward death, and here for the first time, since the disastrous first lines of the Inferno, Dante, the aspirant, is in the lead, and his silent, and almost forgotten alter-egos, Virgil and Statius, have, Cheshire-cat-like been reduced at the end of the Canto to knowing and approving smiles.  This is Eden, a garden whose only tending, is not that of pruning, or planting, or harvesting, but enjoying, one's task only the weaving of garlands for ornamentation, and for gently expressing an attitude of love.  We think of gardens as the imposition of order on nature, an aesthetic practice, but this forest is not like that.  It is Nature as an exultation of its own inner freedom, an expression of the divine life-force that adds beauty to beauty only for the sake of doing so. The poem has evolved to this point as the apex of pastoral poetry, and in deep accord with that position, the wanderer in paradise meets a "lady", unnamed at here, but a sort of Eve-figure, who cannot have been born from Adam's rib, for she is alone, and clearly awaiting her lover, the expected intruder, who can be no other person than Dante himself.  She is, as some commentators have pointed out the Eve, who is only named such after the fall, as she existed in her original innocence and purity.  We will only learn her name in a subsequent canto.  There is such a long tradition of the knight errant coming upon the beautiful peasant girl, and the two coming together for an erotic tryst, that leads to sorrow on both sides, the girl ruined, and sometimes, as in Keats’s La Belle Dame Sans Merci, the knight destroyed.  But here, the poet, having just been purged of lust, quickly learns that Eros here has been transformed, partially because there is no need of it, because we are in a post-coital world where all desire has been satiated, so that the experience here is not one of longing but that of fulfillment.  The higher spiritual frequencies of agape or caritas have gathered all that sexual passion, not into the form of a denial of that passion, but into that passion's natural elevation.  Blake's cry of the mistaken man of "More!  More!"  has given way to the sweet mystery of a song, at first just out of reach of comprehension, on the other side of an uncrossable stream.  This stream is the origin of all rivers on Earth, and is one of two possible streams of thought, i.e., the stream which forgets its past regrets and mistakes, and the stream that recalls one's feelings of love.  You could call this stream a flow of music, which passes between performer and listener, a musical passage of time, wherein the solo instrument of the lady's voice arises naturally out of the orchestral surround of water ripplings, birdchirp and breeze-harped trees, a song which distills the essence of the human from the already rich elixir of Nature.  Dante, enthralled, asks the singer to draw nearer so that he can hear what she is singing, a wish the singer grants, but which we readers, contrary to former parts of the Commedia, are not privy to.  Whatever she sings remains a mystery for us, because, although all other desires have been extinguish, the childlike stirrings of curiosity remain.  How wonderful that Dante should link love and curiosity into this whole atmosphere of fulfillment.  To ask and to receive, that is as natural as the infant's need for the mother's breast and the mother's need to offer it.  And yet, having gone through all of Hell and Purgatory, we cannot really conceive of this place as a nursery.  Indeed, it is specifically stated that this place arises, not from seed, its fruits not part of any developmental mortal life cycle.  This is a place, where grace flows-in as Time-transformed, but not obliterated.  And this Time naturally flows in when the seeker has exhaled all of that identity which defined itself as the divisive actions of Me and Not Me, actions which lead to the destructive narcissisms of Hell and which required purging in the punishments of Purgatory.  In Hell, Time is interminable, in Purgatory, it is an endurance and a breaking-down of mistaken perceptions.  Here, it is suspended, and only unfolds at the pace with which our movements elicit the most awe, the most wonder, the most love.  The aspirant, as Virgil has previously stated, has acquired, through the experiences of Hell, and the cleansing of Purgatory, the freedom to choose what most pleases, and this is the new experience of Time, a flowing forth of change, which only leads from one pleasure to another, or as Paramahansa Yogananda puts it about the depths of meditation, it is "Joy, ever-new."   Here curiosity does not come from the brain, but from the heart, and the lady's response to the poet's inquiries really makes no logical or scientific sense at all, because the reference point of its motivation is not to know in any abstract academic sense — that kind of intellect, as the lady says in line 89, needs to be unclouded, de-mistified.  No, her answer is for the heart, which alone has the power to clear the mind, her explanations are propounded only to satisfy, and to call forth from that satisfaction more wonder, more inspiring curiosity, more love.  They are beyond the reach of any dialectic.

Of course, any post 20th Century reader will see Jungian archetypal depth-psychology all over this canto, the anima-figure of the nameless lady being a projection of the aspirant's own psyche.  The lady is all that, but not only that, and the "not only" is a portal into which the reader of the poem may plunge into the heart of his or her own journey towards transcendence.  The devil of course is in the details, but the angel is there to, even in such changes as the word "vermillion", which has had quite a different emotional coloration in the Inferno.  Thus we find in so many touches here a transformative power awakened, where even the mountain, which in the first canto of the Inferno was a barrier guarded by those three terrible beasts, here has become a lofty and beautiful serenity, no longer even a challenge to the climber, but a presence, whose beautiful and enduring nature serve only to inspire.

1  Eager already to search in and round
2  The heavenly forest, dense and living-green,
3  Which tempered to the eyes the new-born day,

1  Vago già di cercar dentro e dintorno
2  la divina foresta spessa e viva,
3  ch'a li occhi temperava il novo giorno,

4  Withouten more delay I left the bank,
5   Taking the level country slowly, slowly
6   Over the soil that everywhere breathes fragrance.

4  sanza più aspettar, lasciai la riva,
5  prendendo la campagna lento lento
6  su per lo suol che d'ogne parte auliva.

7  A softly-breathing air, that no mutation
8   Had in itself, upon the forehead smote me
9   No heavier blow than of a gentle wind,

7  Un'aura dolce, sanza mutamento
8  avere in sé, mi feria per la fronte
9  non di più colpo che soave vento;

10  Whereat the branches, lightly tremulous,
11  Did all of them bow downward toward that side
12  Where its first shadow casts the Holy Mountain;

10  per cui le fronde, tremolando, pronte
11  tutte quante piegavano a la parte
12  u' la prim' ombra gitta il santo monte;

13  Yet not from their upright direction swayed,
14  So that the little birds upon their tops
15  Should leave the practice of each art of theirs;

13  non però dal loro esser dritto sparte
14  tanto, che li augelletti per le cime
15  lasciasser d'operare ogne lor arte;

16  But with full ravishment the hours of prime,
17  Singing, received they in the midst of leaves,
18  That ever bore a burden to their rhymes,

16  ma con piena letizia l'ore prime,
17  cantando, ricevieno intra le foglie
18  che tenevan bordone a le sue rime,

19  Such as from branch to branch goes gathering on
20  Through the pine forest on the shore of Chiassi,
21  When Eolus unlooses the Sirocco.

19  tal qual di ramo in ramo si raccoglie
20  per la pineta in su 'l lito di Chiassi,
21 quand'Eölo scilocco fuor discioglie.

22  Already my slow steps had carried me
23  Into the ancient wood so far, that I
24  Could not perceive where I had entered it.

22  Già m'avean trasportato i lenti passi
23  dentro a la selva antica tanto, ch'io
24  non potea rivedere ond' io mi 'ntrassi;

25  And lo! my further course a stream cut off,
26  Which tow'rd the left hand with its little waves
27  Bent down the grass that on its margin sprang.

25  ed ecco più andar mi tolse un rio,
26  che 'nver' sinistra con sue picciole onde
27  piegava l'erba che 'n sua ripa uscìo.

28  All waters that on earth most limpid are
29  Would seem to have within themselves some mixture
30  Compared with that which nothing doth conceal,

28   Tutte l'acque che son di qua più monde,
29   parrieno avere in sé mistura alcuna
30   verso di quella, che nulla nasconde

31  Although it moves on with a brown, brown current
32  Under the shade perpetual, that never
33  Ray of the sun lets in, nor of the moon.

31  avvegna che si mova bruna bruna
32  sotto l'ombra perpetüa, che mai
33  raggiar non lascia sole ivi né luna.

34  With feet I stayed, and with mine eyes I passed
35  Beyond the rivulet, to look upon
36  The great variety of the fresh may.

34  Coi piè ristetti e con li occhi passai
35  di là dal fiumicello, per mirare
36  la gran varïazion d'i freschi mai;

37  And there appeared to me (even as appears
38  Suddenly something that doth turn aside
39  Through very wonder every other thought)

37  e là m'apparve, sì com' elli appare
38  subitamente cosa che disvia
39  per maraviglia tutto altro pensare,

40  A lady all alone, who went along
41  Singing and culling floweret after floweret,
42  With which her pathway was all painted over.

40  una donna soletta che si gia
41  e cantando e scegliendo fior da fiore
42  ond' era pinta tutta la sua via. 

43  "Ah, beauteous lady, who in rays of love
44  Dost warm thyself, if I may trust to looks,
45  Which the heart's witnesses are wont to be,

43  “Deh, bella donna, che a' raggi d'amore
44  ti scaldi, s'i' vo' credere a' sembianti
45  che soglion esser testimon del core,

46  May the desire come unto thee to draw
47  Near to this river's bank," I said to her,
48  "So much that I might hear what thou art singing.

46  vegnati in voglia di trarreti avanti,”
47  diss' io a lei, “verso questa rivera,
48  tanto ch'io possa intender che tu canti.

49  Thou makest me remember where and what
50  Proserpina that moment was when lost
51  Her mother her, and she herself the Spring."

49  Tu mi fai rimembrar dove e qual era
50  Proserpina nel tempo che perdette
51  la madre lei, ed ella primavera.” 

52  As turns herself, with feet together pressed
53  And to the ground, a lady who is dancing,
54  And hardly puts one foot before the other,

52  Come si volge, con le piante strette
53  a terra e intra sé, donna che balli,
54  e piede innanzi piede a pena mette,

55  On the vermilion and the yellow flowerets
56  She turned towards me, not in other wise
57  Than maiden who her modest eyes casts down;

55  volsesi in su i vermigli e in su i gialli
55  fioretti verso me, non altrimenti
56  che vergine che li occhi onesti avvalli;

58  And my entreaties made to be content,
59  So near approaching, that the dulcet sound
60  Came unto me together with its meaning

58  e fece i prieghi miei esser contenti,
59  sì appressando sé, che 'l dolce suono
60  veniva a me co' suoi intendimenti.

61  As soon as she was where the grasses are.
62  Bathed by the waters of the beauteous river,
63  To lift her eyes she granted me the boon.

61  Tosto che fu là dove l'erbe sono
62  bagnate già da l'onde del bel fiume,
63  di levar li occhi suoi mi fece dono.

64  I do not think there shone so great a light
65  Under the lids of Venus, when transfixed
66  By her own son, beyond his usual custom!

64  Non credo che splendesse tanto lume
65  sotto le ciglia a Venere, trafitta
66  dal figlio fuor di tutto suo costume.

67  Erect upon the other bank she smiled,
68   Bearing full many colours in her hands,
69   Which that high land produces without seed.

67  Ella ridea da l'altra riva dritta,
68  trattando più color con le sue mani,
69  che l'alta terra sanza seme gitta.

70  Apart three paces did the river make us;
71   But Hellespont, where Xerxes passed across,
72  (A curb still to all human arrogance,)

70  Tre passi ci facea il fiume lontani;
71  ma Elesponto, là 've passò Serse,
72  ancora freno a tutti orgogli umani,

73  More hatred from Leander did not suffer
74  For rolling between Sestos and Abydos,
75  Than that from me, because it oped not then.

73  più odio da Leandro non sofferse
74  per mareggiare intra Sesto e Abido,
75  che quel da me perch' allor non s'aperse.

76  "Ye are new-comers; and because I smile,"
77  Began she, "peradventure, in this place
78  Elect to human nature for its nest,

76  “Voi siete nuovi, e forse perch' io rido,”
77  cominciò ella, “in questo luogo eletto
78  a l'umana natura per suo nido

79  Some apprehension keeps you marvelling;
80  But the psalm 'Delectasti' giveth light
81  Which has the power to uncloud your intellect.

79  maravigliando tienvi alcun sospetto;
80  ma luce rende il salmo Delectasti,
81  che puote disnebbiar vostro intelletto.

82  And thou who foremost art, and didst entreat me,
83  Speak, if thou wouldst hear more; for I came ready
84  To all thy questionings, as far as needful."

82  E tu che se' dinanzi e mi pregasti,
83  dì s'altro vuoli udir; ch'i' venni presta
84  ad ogne tua question tanto che basti.”

85  "The water," said I, "and the forest's sound,
86  Are combating within me my new faith
87  In something which I heard opposed to this."

85  “L'acqua,” diss' io, “e 'l suon de la foresta
86  impugnan dentro a me novella fede
87  di cosa ch'io udi' contraria a questa.”

88  Whence she: "I will relate how from its cause
89  Proceedeth that which maketh thee to wonder,
89  And purge away the cloud that smites upon thee.

88  Ond' ella: “Io dicerò come procede
89  per sua cagion ciò ch'ammirar ti face,
90  e purgherò la nebbia che ti fiede.

91  The Good Supreme, sole in itself delighting,
92  Created man good, and this goodly place
93  Gave him as hansel of eternal peace.

91  Lo sommo Ben, che solo esso a sé piace,
92  fé l'uom buono e a bene, e questo loco
93  diede per arr' a lui d'etterna pace.

94  By his default short while he sojourned here;
95  By his default to weeping and to toil
96  He changed his innocent laughter and sweet play.

94  Per sua difalta qui dimorò poco;
95  per sua difalta in pianto e in affanno
96  cambiò onesto riso e dolce gioco.

97  That the disturbance which below is made
98  By exhalations of the land and water,
99  (Which far as may be follow after heat,)

97  Perché 'l turbar che sotto da sé fanno
98  l'essalazion de l'acqua e de la terra,
99  che quanto posson dietro al calor vanno,

100  Might not upon mankind wage any war,
101  This mount ascended tow'rds the heaven so high,
102  And is exempt, from there where it is locked.

100  a l'uomo non facesse alcuna guerra,
101  questo monte salìo verso 'l ciel tanto,
102  e libero n'è d'indi ove si serra.

103  Now since the universal atmosphere
104  Turns in a circuit with the primal motion
105  Unless the circle is broken on some side,

103  Or perché in circuito tutto quanto
102   l'aere si volge con la prima volta,
103  se non li è rotto il cerchio d'alcun canto,

106  Upon this height, that all is disengaged
107  In living ether, doth this motion strike
108  And make the forest sound, for it is dense;

106  in questa altezza ch'è tutta disciolta
107  ne l'aere vivo, tal moto percuote,
108  e fa sonar la selva perch' è folta;

109  And so much power the stricken plant possesses
110  That with its virtue it impregns the air,
111  And this, revolving, scatters it around;

109  e la percossa pianta tanto puote,
110  che de la sua virtute l'aura impregna
111  e quella poi, girando, intorno scuote;

112  And yonder earth, according as 'tis worthy
113  In self or in its clime, conceives and bears
114  Of divers qualities the divers trees;

112  e l'altra terra, secondo ch'è degna
113  per sé e per suo ciel, concepe e figlia
114  di diverse virtù diverse legna.

115  It should not seem a marvel then on earth,
116  This being heard, whenever any plant
117  Without seed manifest there taketh root.

115  Non parrebbe di là poi maraviglia,
116  udito questo, quando alcuna pianta
117  sanza seme palese vi s'appiglia.

118  And thou must know, this holy table-land
119  In which thou art is full of every seed,
120  And fruit has in it never gathered there.

118  E saper dei che la campagna santa
119  dove tu se', d'ogne semenza è piena,
120  e frutto ha in sé che di là non si schianta.

121  The water which thou seest springs not from vein
122  Restored by vapour that the cold condenses,
123  Like to a stream that gains or loses breath;

121  L'acqua che vedi non surge di vena
122  che ristori vapor che gel converta,
123  come fiume ch'acquista e perde lena;

124  But issues from a fountain safe and certain,
125  Which by the will of God as much regains
126  As it discharges, open on two sides.

124  ma esce di fontana salda e certa,
125  che tanto dal voler di Dio riprende,
126  quant' ella versa da due parti aperta.

127  Upon this side with virtue it descends,
128  Which takes away all memory of sin;
129  On that, of every good deed done restores it.

127  Da questa parte con virtù discende
128  che toglie altrui memoria del peccato;
129  da l'altra d'ogne ben fatto la rende.

130  Here Lethe, as upon the other side
131  Eunoe, it is called; and worketh not
132  If first on either side it be not tasted.

130  Quinci Letè; così da l'altro lato
131  Eünoè si chiama, e non adopra
132  se quinci e quindi pria non è gustato:

133  This every other savour doth transcend;
134  And notwithstanding slaked so far may be
134  Thy thirst, that I reveal to thee no more,

133  a tutti altri sapori esto è di sopra.
132  E avvegna ch'assai possa esser sazia
133  la sete tua perch' io più non ti scuopra,

136  I'll give thee a corollary still in grace,
137  Nor think my speech will be to thee less dear
138  If it spread out beyond my promise to thee.

136  darotti un corollario ancor per grazia;
137  né credo che 'l mio dir ti sia men caro,
138  se oltre promession teco si spazia.

139  Those who in ancient times have feigned in song
140  The Age of Gold and its felicity,
141  Dreamed of this place perhaps upon Parnassus.

139  Quelli ch'anticamente poetaro
140  l'età de l'oro e suo stato felice,
141  forse in Parnaso esto loco sognaro.

142  Here was the human race in innocence;
143  Here evermore was Spring, and every fruit;
144  This is the nectar of which each one speaks."

142  Qui fu innocente l'umana radice;
143  qui primavera sempre e ogne frutto;
144  nettare è questo di che ciascun dice.”

145  Then backward did I turn me wholly round
146   Unto my Poets, and saw that with a smile
147  They had been listening to these closing words;

145  Io mi rivolsi 'n dietro allora tutto
146  a' miei poeti, e vidi che con riso
147  udito avëan l'ultimo costrutto;

148  Then to the beautiful lady turned mine eyes.

148  poi a la bella donna torna' il viso.

Canto XXIX
Is the allegorical the enemy of the visionary?  Or do we contemplate the allegory so deeply, that it conjures vision?  In Dry Salvages, Eliot says: "We had the experience but missed the meaning."  But here in this canto, we are tempted to do the reverse, to have the meaning, or at least what the numerous commentators have told us is the meaning, while we miss the experience.  I think of the DMT experiences described by Terrance McKenna, those Machine Elves, whose purpose seems to be to teach us a way to speak a language that gives birth to things.  This is an IT experience, jarringly alien to our everyday waking or even everynight dreaming conceptions of reality.  This IT experience strips away as utter, and very pale illusion, whatever previous conceptions we had of things and of ourselves, and makes us think, so intense is its occurrence, that we might be dying or have already died, but if we have died, it was, as McKenna says "death by astonishment."  What I am arguing for here is a reification of the experience of realness.  This IT experience, which is the subject of Canto XXIX, is that which for all its Christian connotations cannot be held within the boundaries of Christian iconography, or for that matter, within any ordinary boundaries at all.  What I am arguing for is the necessity for the reader to accept the visionary element, and not the allegorical one, as the most crucial aspect of what the text here, and throughout, really (and I use that word with deliberate emphasis) conveys — and that is: the transformative power of vision.  The vision is not ours, until every element kills us by astonishment, and rebirths us in a state of wonder.

For Dante, I think, as he worked more deeply in the vernacular phenomenon in projects which preceded the Commedia, he began to experience language as vision.  As a scientist might use an electron microscope, or perhaps more to the point, as some avatar might develop a sense organ beyond those traditionally assigned to humans as sight, hearing, touch, taste, and smell, Dante developed the organ of poetry, a type of language that was in and of itself an aspect of the visionary, a probe, with two-fold searchlights, one view reaching from what we might call the ordinary world of sense experience in our state of a heightened but still everyday experience of the world and an everynight experience of our dreams, and the other view that from the hyperdimensional, which is entangled and interpenetrating our ordinary world, but also a loka quite beyond it.  Why Dante keeps insisting upon the images and experiences his astral body undergoes in the 3-fold world of the Commedia as real, and in fact, more real, than the so-called ordinary world, is because in this loka of the Commedia, through the living vehicle of poetic language, he has an expanded freedom in space, that is, an ability to create, imagine, and navigate the geographies of Hell and Purgatory, and the cosmology of Paradise by means of an expanded freedom in Time.  Of this latter freedom, we can think of it like this.  In ordinary reality Time is a unidirectional flow from past, through the present, and towards the future, with the present alone as real, the past a virtual reality of causes creating the reality of the present, and the future a possible reality determined by the actions of the present.  This is Time's arrow, moving always as a point along its line, and we, in ordinary experience, have no more freedom to move off of this line, than a passenger in a train car might move in some other direction other than that of the track the train must follow.  Through the poetry of the Commedia, Dante has acquired the ability to experience, not only the diachronic time of a Dante, as aspirant, and a Dante, as poet, the former experiencing what the latter is creating, but also any number of expanded or contracted temporal areas, which give us a sense of a Time which has the volume supplied by metaphor and allegory, the volume supplied by hyperreal visions, the volume that has created readers in all subsequent eras since the poem suddenly erupted onto our historical track in the early years of the 14th century.  The time of the entire journey of aspirant-vehicle through the experience of Hell, Purgatory, and Paradise is the seven days of Holy Week, his Earth time, in the calendrical historical year of 1300 A.D.  But the poem navigates this Time with a freedom which stretches in several directions, through the historical past, through the prophesized future, through the realms of pagan mythology, and Christian exemplars, through the Time dimensions of various styles of poetry, from Virgil, the troubadours, Statius, Guido Cavalcanti, and even his own earlier work, and most astonishingly through the times of all his subsequent readers and commentators, who continue to proliferate areas of Time that the poem anticipates, just as Virgil's poetry anticipates Dante's, and as Homer's Virgil's.  It may be that we experience, in our ordinary temporal reality, this hyperdimensional volume of Time as a kind of flickering of consciousnesses, as in the metaphor that the text uses in lines 4 - 6 of this canto, as Nymphs dashing through forest shades and forest lights.  This flickering phenomenon is well known as a portal to altered states of consciousness, probably beginning as early humans stared into the flicker of firelight, or lounged under a canopy of flickering leaf apertures.  It comes into the present as the flicker of film projectors, of Brion Gysin's Dream Machine, of Disco balls and other stroboscopic phenomenon, which were found to have the power of certain psychedelic drugs as a way to trigger hallucinatory visions.  These visions are experienced as superstimuli, more real than real (Watch a small child before the flicker of a TV screen.), and this is what I believe the aspirant, Dante, is experiencing here, in a weird temporal locale between a lightning flash and its subsequent thunderclap.  

What is this vision and how did it take shape in this particular form.  It is a procession, a type of spectacle, "a live, shared, experience," as one event designer puts it, between participants and audience.  We have evidence of processions as old as the Bronze Age (sixth Millennium B.C.) rock carvings of Boghaz-Keui in modern day Turkey, so it's safe to say that this is one of the primal experiences of humans, which we find in Egypt, in Greece phallic processions, in the Roman Triumph, and of course in wedding marches, funeral rites, and in religious ceremonies.  Dante’s vision here seems to by an amalgamation concocted from various scriptural sources, which one commentator, Gian Luca Pierotti,  traces as follows

1) 24 books of the Old Testament
2) 4 Gospels, Mathew, Mark, Luke, John
3) 1 griffin
4) 3 theological virtues (love, hope, faith)
5) 4 cardinal virtues (prudence, fortitude, temperance, justice)
6) 2 "authors" of Book of Acts and major Epistles: Luke and Paul
7) 4 "authors" of lesser Epistles: Peter, James, John, Jude
8) 1 Apocalypse: John

Nothing invalid about this listing, it can be textually supported, and if you were a Christian Monk practicing the Liturgy of the hours 8 times a day, everyday of your life, and contemplating these images, no doubt a huge superstimulus would be created in your mind, that would give birth to all kinds of dreams and visions, and if we add to this experience of countless practitioners for centuries together into what Rupert Sheldrake has described as a field of morphic resonance, these visions, in this form would pervade the individual as a kind of group consciousness, with a cultural and psychological resonance that might take on the rather fabulous rainbow luminance by which Dante colors the entire spectacle.  But for many contemporary readers this cultural resonance has faded, it no longer grips us, and seems more scholarly than spectacular.  That is why chasing down cultural references, I believe, depotentiates the vision, and serves the very opposite function, which the intensity of the poetic experience requires.  If the reader, instead, would call to mind, rehearse, and contemplate the image presenter here, than their own set of resonances might arise, and still supported by the text, each might well create an eccentric set of metaphors regarding the so-called meanings behind the elements of this processional.

Have you ever walked across a field towards dusk, approaching a line of trees, the last gold of the sunset backlighting the trees which cast you in shadow as you approach?  Have you suddenly been possessed by a feeling of awe, a feeling of presence, whereby the flickering leaves lent to your emotions an otherworldliness, a feeling that your ordinary vision was being transcended and you were entering a world of time distortions and hyperreality light?  Now these 7 trees exude as a candle exudes light, a moony eeriness, in the form of translucent rainbows, beneath which there follows in slow processing, two by two, four and twenty elders.  Who are these solemn celebrants, and what does their processional mean?  After them, a boxlike formation appears, the four-corners of which are wheel-like vortices which spin prismatically, the forms of living creatures arising from the whirl, and then sinking back into it: a man, a lion, a cherubic figure suggestive with a somewhat bovine or ox-like countenance, and an eagle, and in the midst of these four, there is a two-wheeled chariot, pulled by a creature half-lion, half eagle, the lion parts red and white, the raptor parts gold.  By the right wheel of this chariot, are three beautiful women, all diaphanously dressed, one silken clothed like to rubies, one like to emeralds, and one like the sparkle of sun or moon light on deep, new-fallen snow.  These three dance round and round, the ruby then the snow maiden, in graceful succession, leading the emerald.  By the left wheel of the chariot, four ladies, all in purple, dance, one of these ladies having a third eye open in the place which the Hindus call the bindu, between the brows.  Behind this car, 2 men follow, diversely clad.  One you intuit is a healer, perhaps a dispenser of herbs, the other is a surgeon, who wields a scalpel-sharp sword.  Behind this pair trod four whose demeanor suggests a sort of commoners' poverty, and behind these four, and bringing up the rear of this astonishing procession, an old man hobbles, eyes closed, as if sleepwalking.  

This vision is so powerful for you, that for days, perhaps months or years afterward, you contemplate its elements, arriving at one conclusion after another, any one of which could be correct, but always the vision seems to suggest more and deeper meanings.  You think about the arrangement of numbers.  the 7 candle-trees, the 4 and 20 elders, the four living creatures, the single chariot, with its 3 dancers on one side, and 4 on the other, and the seven figures concluding the rite, sequenced 2, 4, and 1 (7 in all).  Could the whole procession be proportional aspects, not of Time as a line, but of Time as a volume? the 7 days of the week, the 24 hours in the day, the four seasons of the year, the 2 halves of the day — 1 bright, 1 dark — the four quarters of the moon ... and is the sleepwalking old man, really the dreamer who dreams all of this? and have we seen the entire procession in reverse, the last figure, who seems to be a trailer, really the source and leader after all?  And what do the wheels represent, and these circular motions of dances, combined with the progressive motion of the entire procession?  Why dancing ladies? why all these displays of rainbow lights? and these particular and brilliant colors so precisely attributed to the forms?  The more you ponder all this — as vision — the stronger the vision becomes, until finally you come to realize that there is something archetypal at work here, as if somehow you have come to experience something very precise in its elements, but very porous and accepting of any meaning you might ascribe to the it.  If this is Time condensed, does such Time represent non-physical aspects of the body, or of phases of human history or of experience, usually spread out in the sequences of minutes, hours, centuries, things as non-visualizable as emotions, but now appearing in visual form?  And does the music and its progressive order of this along with its numerological precision, expand its power, precisely because of it abstract qualities, giving us some hint of the non-physical organizing power of the cosmos to arrange matter into its myriad forms?

If we keep reviewing the vision qua vision, keep multiplying questions in lieu of freezing our inquiries with definitive answers, perhaps this experience will take root in us as an experience, and we will see, that it is the meaning which shifts or magnifies, because the experience, like a spiritual yeast or like a chemical catalyst, keeps shifting and magnifying who we are in relation to who we might become.

1  Singing like unto an enamoured lady
2  She, with the ending of her words, continued:
3  "Beati quorum tecta sunt peccata."

1  Cantando come donna innamorata,
2  continüò col fin di sue parole:
3  “Beati quorum tecta sunt peccata!”

4  And even as Nymphs, that wandered all alone
5  Among the sylvan shadows, sedulous
6  One to avoid and one to see the sun,

4  E come ninfe che si givan sole
5  per le salvatiche ombre, disïando
6  qual di veder, qual di fuggir lo sole,

7  She then against the stream moved onward, going
8  Along the bank, and I abreast of her,
9  Her little steps with little steps attending.

7  allor si mosse contra 'l fiume, andando
8  su per la riva; e io pari di lei,
9  picciol passo con picciol seguitando.

10  Between her steps and mine were not a hundred,
11  When equally the margins gave a turn,
12  In such a way, that to the East I faced.

10  Non eran cento tra ' suoi passi e ' miei,
11  quando le ripe igualmente dier volta,
12  per modo ch'a levante mi rendei.

13  Nor even thus our way continued far
14  Before the lady wholly turned herself
15  Unto me, saying, "Brother, look and listen!"

13  Né ancor fu così nostra via molta,
14  quando la donna tutta a me si torse,
15  dicendo: “Frate mio, guarda e ascolta.”

16  And lo! a sudden lustre ran across
17  On every side athwart the spacious forest,
18  Such that it made me doubt if it were lightning.

16  Ed ecco un lustro sùbito trascorse
17  da tutte parti per la gran foresta,
18  tal che di balenar mi mise in forse.

19  But since the lightning ceases as it comes,
20  And that continuing brightened more and more,
21  Within my thought I said, "What thing is this?"

19  Ma perché 'l balenar, come vien, resta,
20  e quel, durando, più e più splendeva,
21  nel mio pensier dicea: “Che cosa è questa?”

22  And a delicious melody there ran
23  Along the luminous air, whence holy zeal
24  Made me rebuke the hardihood of Eve;

22  E una melodia dolce correva
23  per l'aere luminoso; onde buon zelo
24  mi fé riprender l'ardimento d'Eva,

25  For there where earth and heaven obedient were,
26  The woman only, and but just created,
27  Could not endure to stay 'neath any veil;

25  che là dove ubidia la terra e 'l cielo,
26  femmina, sola e pur testé formata,
27  non sofferse di star sotto alcun velo; 

28  Underneath which had she devoutly stayed,
29  I sooner should have tasted those delights
30  Ineffable, and for a longer time.

28  sotto 'l qual se divota fosse stata,
29  avrei quelle ineffabili delizie
30  sentite prima e più lunga fïata.

31  While 'mid such manifold first-fruits I walked
32   Of the eternal pleasure all enrapt,
33  And still solicitous of more delights,

31  Mentr' io m'andava tra tante primizie
32  de l'etterno piacer tutto sospeso,
33  e disïoso ancora a più letizie,
34  In front of us like an enkindled fire
35  Became the air beneath the verdant boughs,
36  And the sweet sound as singing now was heard.

34  dinanzi a noi, tal quale un foco acceso,
35  ci si fé l'aere sotto i verdi rami;
36  e 'l dolce suon per canti era già inteso.

37  O Virgins sacrosanct! if ever hunger,
38  Vigils, or cold for you I have endured,
39  The occasion spurs me their reward to claim!

37  O sacrosante Vergini, se fami,
38  freddi o vigilie mai per voi soffersi,
39  cagion mi sprona ch'io mercé vi chiami.

40  Now Helicon must needs pour forth for me,
41  And with her choir Urania must assist me,
42  To put in verse things difficult to think.

40  Or convien che Elicona per me versi,
41  e Uranìe m'aiuti col suo coro
42  forti cose a pensar mettere in versi.

43  A little farther on, seven trees of gold
44  In semblance the long space still intervening
45  Between ourselves and them did counterfeit;

43  Poco più oltre, sette alberi d'oro
44  falsava nel parere il lungo tratto
45  del mezzo ch'era ancor tra noi e loro;

46 But when I had approached so near to them
47  The common object, which the sense deceives,
48  Lost not by distance any of its marks,

46  ma quand' i' fui sì presso di lor fatto,
47  che l'obietto comun, che 'l senso inganna,
48  non perdea per distanza alcun su atto,

49  The faculty that lends discourse to reason
50  Did apprehend that they were candlesticks,
51  And in the voices of the song "Hosanna!"

49  la virtù ch'a ragion discorso ammanna,
50  sì com' elli eran candelabri apprese,
51  e ne le voci del cantare “Osanna.”

52  Above them flamed the harness beautiful,
53  Far brighter than the moon in the serene
54  Of midnight, at the middle of her month.

52  Di sopra fiammeggiava il bello arnese
53  più chiaro assai che luna per sereno
54  di mezza notte nel suo mezzo mese.

55  I turned me round, with admiration filled,
56  To good Virgilius, and he answered me
57  With visage no less full of wonderment.

55  Io mi rivolsi d'ammirazion pieno
56  al buon Virgilio, ed esso mi rispuose
57  con vista carca di stupor non meno. 

58  Then back I turned my face to those high things,
59  Which moved themselves towards us so sedately,
60  They had been distanced by new-wedded brides.

58  Indi rendei l'aspetto a l'alte cose
59  che si movieno incontr' a noi sì tardi,
60  che foran vinte da novelle spose.

61  The lady chid me: "Why dost thou burn only
62  So with affection for the living lights,
63  And dost not look at what comes after them?"

61  La donna mi sgridò: “Perché pur ardi
62  sì ne l'affetto de le vive luci,
63  e ciò che vien di retro a lor non guardi?”

64  Then saw I people, as behind their leaders,
65  Coming behind them, garmented in white,
66  And such a whiteness never was on earth.

64  Genti vid' io allor, come a lor duci,
65  venire appresso, vestite di bianco;
66  e tal candor di qua già mai non fuci.
67  The water on my left flank was resplendent,
68  And back to me reflected my left side,
69  E'en as a mirror, if I looked therein.

67  L'acqua imprendëa dal sinistro fianco,
68  e rendea me la mia sinistra costa,
69  s'io riguardava in lei, come specchio anco.

70  When I upon my margin had such post
71  That nothing but the stream divided us,
72  Better to see I gave my steps repose;

70  Quand' io da la mia riva ebbi tal posta,
71  che solo il fiume mi facea distante,
72  per veder meglio ai passi diedi sosta,

73  And I beheld the flamelets onward go,
74  Leaving behind themselves the air depicted,
75  And they of trailing pennons had the semblance,

73  e vidi le fiammelle andar davante,
74  lasciando dietro a sé l'aere dipinto,
75  e di tratti pennelli avean sembiante;

76  So that it overhead remained distinct
77  With sevenfold lists, all of them of the colours
78  Whence the sun's bow is made, and Delia's girdle.

76  sì che lì sopra rimanea distinto
77  di sette liste, tutte in quei colori
78  onde fa l'arco il Sole e Delia il cinto.

79  These standards to the rearward longer were
80  Than was my sight; and, as it seemed to me,
81  Ten paces were the outermost apart.

79  Questi ostendali in dietro eran maggiori
80  che la mia vista; e, quanto a mio avviso,
81  diece passi distavan quei di fori.

82  Under so fair a heaven as I describe
83  The four and twenty Elders, two by two,
84  Came on incoronate with flower-de-luce.

82  Sotto così bel ciel com' io diviso,
83  ventiquattro seniori, a due a due,
84  coronati venien di fiordaliso.

85  They all of them were singing: "Blessed thou
86  Among the daughters of Adam art, and blessed
87  For evermore shall be thy loveliness."

85  Tutti cantavan: “Benedicta tue
86  ne le figlie d'Adamo, e benedette
87  sieno in etterno le bellezze tue!”

88  After the flowers and other tender grasses
89  In front of me upon the other margin
90  Were disencumbered of that race elect,

88  Poscia che i fiori e l'altre fresche erbette
89  a rimpetto di me da l'altra sponda
90  libere fuor da quelle genti elette,

91  Even as in heaven star followeth after star,
92  There came close after them four animals,
93  Incoronate each one with verdant leaf.

91  sì come luce luce in ciel seconda,
92  vennero appresso lor quattro animali,
93  coronati ciascun di verde fronda.
94  Plumed with six wings was every one of them,
95  The plumage full of eyes; the eyes of Argus
96  If they were living would be such as these.

94  Ognuno era pennuto di sei ali;
95  le penne piene d'occhi; e li occhi d'Argo,
96  se fosser vivi, sarebber cotali.

97  Reader! to trace their forms no more I waste
98  My rhymes; for other spendings press me so,
99  That I in this cannot be prodigal.

97  A descriver lor forme più non spargo
98  rime, lettor; ch'altra spesa mi strigne,
99  tanto ch'a questa non posso esser largo;

100  But read Ezekiel, who depicteth them
101  As he beheld them from the region cold
102  Coming with cloud, with whirlwind, and with fire;

100  ma leggi Ezechïel, che li dipigne
101  come li vide da la fredda parte
102  venir con vento e con nube e con igne;

103And such as thou shalt find them in his pages,
104  Such were they here; saving that in their plumage
105  John is with me, and differeth from him.

103  e quali i troverai ne le sue carte,
104  tali eran quivi, salvo ch'a le penne
105  Giovanni è meco e da lui si diparte.

106  The interval between these four contained
107  A chariot triumphal on two wheels,
108  Which by a Griffin's neck came drawn along;

106  Lo spazio dentro a lor quattro contenne
107  un carro, in su due rote, trïunfale,
108  ch'al collo d'un grifon tirato venne.

109  And upward he extended both his wings
110  Between the middle list and three and three,
111  So that he injured none by cleaving it.

109  Esso tendeva in sù l'una e l'altra ale
110  tra la mezzana e le tre e tre liste,
111  sì ch'a nulla, fendendo, facea male.

112  So high they rose that they were lost to sight;
113  His limbs were gold, so far as he was bird,
114  And white the others with vermilion mingled.

112  Tanto salivan che non eran viste;
113  le membra d'oro avea quant' era uccello,
114  e bianche l'altre, di vermiglio miste.

115  Not only Rome with no such splendid car
116  E'er gladdened Africanus, or Augustus,
117  But poor to it that of the Sun would be,—

115  Non che Roma di carro così bello
116  rallegrasse Affricano, o vero Augusto,
117  ma quel del Sol saria pover con ello;

118  That of the Sun, which swerving was burnt up
119  At the importunate orison of Earth,
120  When Jove was so mysteriously just.

118  quel del Sol che, svïando, fu combusto
119  per l'orazion de la Terra devota,
120  quando fu Giove arcanamente giusto.

121  Three maidens at the right wheel in a circle
122  Came onward dancing; one so very red
123  That in the fire she hardly had been noted.

121  Tre donne in giro da la destra rota
122  venian danzando; l'una tanto rossa
123  ch'a pena fora dentro al foco nota;

124  The second was as if her flesh and bones
125  Had all been fashioned out of emerald;
126  The third appeared as snow but newly fallen.

124  l'altr' era come se le carni e l'ossa
125  fossero state di smeraldo fatte;
126  la terza parea neve testé mossa;

127  And now they seemed conducted by the white,
128  Now by the red, and from the song of her
129  The others took their step, or slow or swift.

127  e or parëan da la bianca tratte,
128  or da la rossa; e dal canto di questa
129  l'altre toglien l'andare e tarde e ratte.

130  Upon the left hand four made holiday
131  Vested in purple, following the measure
132  Of one of them with three eyes m her head.

130  Da la sinistra quattro facean festa,
131  in porpore vestite, dietro al modo
132  d'una di lor ch'avea tre occhi in testa.

133  In rear of all the group here treated of
134  Two old men I beheld, unlike in habit,
135  But like in gait, each dignified and grave.

133  Appresso tutto il pertrattato nodo
134  vidi due vecchi in abito dispari,
136  ma pari in atto e onesto e sodo.

137  One showed himself as one of the disciples
138  Of that supreme Hippocrates, whom nature
139  Made for the animals she holds most dear;

136  L'un si mostrava alcun de' famigliari
137  di quel sommo Ipocràte che natura
138   a li animali fé ch'ell' ha più cari;

139  Contrary care the other manifested,
140  With sword so shining and so sharp, it caused
141  Terror to me on this side of the river.

139  mostrava l'altro la contraria cura
140  con una spada lucida e aguta,
141  tal che di qua dal rio mi fé paura.

142  Thereafter four I saw of humble aspect,
143  And behind all an aged man alone
144  Walking in sleep with countenance acute.

142  Poi vidi quattro in umile paruta;
143  e di retro da tutti un vecchio solo
144  venir, dormendo, con la faccia arguta.

145  And like the foremost company these seven
146  Were habited; yet of the flower-de-luce
147  No garland round about the head they wore,

145  E questi sette col primaio stuolo
146  erano abitüati, ma di gigli
147  dintorno al capo non facëan brolo,

148  But of the rose, and other flowers vermilion;
149  At little distance would the sight have sworn
150  That all were in a flame above their brows.

148  anzi di rose e d'altri fior vermigli;
149  giurato avria poco lontano aspetto
150  che tutti ardesser di sopra da' cigli.

151  And when the car was opposite to me
152  Thunder was heard; and all that folk august
153  Seemed to have further progress interdicted,

151  E quando il carro a me fu a rimpetto,
152  un tuon s'udì, e quelle genti degne
153  parvero aver l'andar più interdetto,

154  There with the vanward ensigns standing still.

154  fermandosi ivi con le prime insegne.

Canto XXX
The meeting with Beatrice, the departure of Virgil, how cannot these be the culmination of the poem?  The aspirant has gone through Hell, has been purged of each of the 7 deadly sins in Purgatory, is now in Eden, and is reunited with his beloved, his own split off soul and interior immortal self and conscience, shouldn't we be witnessing a marriage ceremony?  What pageant is this, what rite or triumph is being presented?  The complicated metaphor of the Septentrion, the 7, the number of virginity, the return to the metaphor of the sea, a metaphor which recalls the image in Canto One of the entire Commedia, wherein Dante imagines himself a swimmer looking back from shore on the ocean which almost drowned him, and now we have the image of an admiral, who stands on the deck of one ship, shouting encouragement to his fleet as they finally arrive safely in port, the talk of duty, and of veils and clouds, albeit clouds of flower, like confetti thrown into the air to flurry down on the figure in the griffin-drawn car, how can this not be a moment of supreme joy, supreme relief, and the most blissful of consummations?  Maybe it should be, but it is not.  It is a moment of double grief, the one the loss of Virgil, the other for that sin which is not remembered, that sin so heinous that the unconscious has hidden it from the sinner, and, unremembered, it is a loss, unwept for, unpurged.  If this is a wedding, it is one in which the bride assumes the role that in the Bible is given over to Satan, the father of crime, whose sole named crime is that of Accuser.  Bride as virgin, bride as the untouchable, bride as the old Troubadorian trope of the cold, cruel ice-queen punisher, the one who demands ordeals and impossible feats, the one who asks all, and rewards nothing, here Beatrice is the bride that denies union, denies joy, even denies the oblivion of Lethe and its baptismal waters of forgetfulness.  She turns the aspirant's attention to what she has had to endure on his behalf, she makes him ashamed of his own image in the stream which divides them.  In his shame, he transfers his gaze to the grass, which all living flesh must become, and that grave is preferable to his shame.  But that grave, as the aspirant well knows, is only a portal to more grief and not a release.  There is no wedding, and Dante's, and by extension the reader's own soul — my soul, my life — cannot be fulfilled until this final shame is fully realized, fully felt, and fully purged by tears of true repentance.  It is almost as if Beatrice is asking Dante to take responsibility for being born, and to admit that the entirety of original sin, and the unnaturalness of inhabiting a body which comes with murderous desires, and which must be inhabited, loved, possessed, but only so that it may suffer torment and death.  But how could Dante, or the reader, or to be more anguished, I myself, feel guilt for my very life, for all that is mortal, and repent for a sin, the purging of which is the death of the flesh that not only houses, but which seems indistinguishable from my very soul?  I must confess that it is not only grief that I experience at this juncture, but terror.  The crux of this Canto is a huge question mark, whose Sphinx-like riddle is well known: Man, humanity, the creature made by Time and destroyed by Time.  This plague that Dante is suffering, that I am suffering, is Oedipal to the nth degree.  The bride that awaits after he has killed God in himself, is his own mother, and after Dante has killed reason, Virgil, the bride that awaits him is the most inviolable taboo.  So, here we are: in the midst of the supreme Vision, the spectacle of spectacles, and the dazzle of our vision must be dimmed by tears.    

1  When the Septentrion of the highest heaven
2  (Which never either setting knew or rising,
3  Nor veil of other cloud than that of sin,

1  Quando il settentrïon del primo cielo,
2  che né occaso mai seppe né orto
3  né d'altra nebbia che di colpa velo,

4  And which made every one therein aware
5  Of his own duty, as the lower makes
6  Whoever turns the helm to come to port)

4  e che faceva lì ciascuno accorto
5  di suo dover, come 'l più basso face
6  qual temon gira per venire a porto,

7  Motionless halted, the veracious people,
8  That came at first between it and the Griffin,
9  Turned themselves to the car, as to their peace.

7  fermo s'affisse: la gente verace,
8  venuta prima tra 'l grifone ed esso,
9  al carro volse sé come a sua pace;

10  And one of them, as if by Heaven commissioned,
11  Singing, "Veni, sponsa, de Libano"
12  Shouted three times, and all the others after.

10  e un di loro, quasi da ciel messo,
11  “Veni, sponsa, de Libano” cantando
12  gridò tre volte, e tutti li altri appresso.

13  Even as the Blessed at the final summons
14  Shall rise up quickened each one from his cavern,
15  Uplifting light the reinvested flesh,

13  Quali i beati al novissimo bando
14  surgeran presti ognun di sua caverna,
15  la revestita voce alleluiando,

16  So upon that celestial chariot
17  A hundred rose 'ad vocem tanti senis,'
18  Ministers and messengers of life eternal.

16  cotali in su la divina basterna
17  si levar cento, ad vocem tanti senis,
18  ministri e messaggier di vita etterna.

19  They all were saying, "Benedictus qui venis,"
20  And, scattering flowers above and round about,
21  "Manibus o date lilia plenis."

19  Tutti dicean: “Benedictus qui venis!”
20  e fior gittando e di sopra e dintorno,
21  “Manibus, oh, date lilïa plenis!”

22  Ere now have I beheld, as day began,
23  The eastern hemisphere all tinged with rose,
24  And the other heaven with fair serene adorned;

22  Io vidi già nel cominciar del giorno
23  la parte orïental tutta rosata,
24  e l'altro ciel di bel sereno addorno;

25  And the sun's face, uprising, overshadowed
26  So that by tempering influence of vapours
27  For a long interval the eye sustained it;

25  e la faccia del sol nascere ombrata,
26  sì che per temperanza di vapori
27  l'occhio la sostenea lunga fïata:

28  Thus in the bosom of a cloud of flowers
29  Which from those hands angelical ascended,
30  And downward fell again inside and out,

28  così dentro una nuvola di fiori
29  che da le mani angeliche saliva
30  e ricadeva in giù dentro e di fori,

31  Over her snow-white veil with olive cinct
32  Appeared a lady under a green mantle,
33  Vested in colour of the living flame.

31  sovra candido vel cinta d'uliva
32  donna m'apparve, sotto verde manto
33  vestita di color di fiamma viva.

34  And my own spirit, that already now
35  So long a time had been, that in her presence
36  Trembling with awe it had not stood abashed,

34  E lo spirito mio, che già cotanto
35  tempo era stato ch'a la sua presenza
36  non era di stupor, tremando, affranto,

37  Without more knowledge having by mine eyes,
38  Through occult virtue that from her proceeded
39  Of ancient love the mighty influence felt.

37  sanza de li occhi aver più conoscenza,
38  per occulta virtù che da lei mosse,
39  d'antico amor sentì la gran potenza.

40  As soon as on my vision smote the power
41  Sublime, that had already pierced me through
42  Ere from my boyhood I had yet come forth,

40  Tosto che ne la vista mi percosse
41  l'alta virtù che già m'avea trafitto
42  prima ch'io fuor di püerizia fosse,

43  To the left hand I turned with that reliance
44  With which the little child runs to his mother,
45  When he has fear, or when he is afflicted,

43  volsimi a la sinistra col respitto
44  col quale il fantolin corre a la mamma
45  quando ha paura o quando elli è afflitto,

46  To say unto Virgilius: "Not a drachm
47  Of blood remains in me, that does not tremble;
48  I know the traces of the ancient flame."

46  per dicere a Virgilio: “Men che dramma
47  di sangue m'è rimaso che non tremi:
48  conosco i segni de l'antica fiamma.”

49  But us Virgilius of himself deprived
50  Had left, Virgilius, sweetest of all fathers,
51  Virgilius, to whom I for safety gave me:

49  Ma Virgilio n'avea lasciati scemi
50  di sé, Virgilio dolcissimo patre,
51  Virgilio a cui per mia salute die'mi;

52  Nor whatsoever lost the ancient mother
53  Availed my cheeks now purified from dew,
54  That weeping they should not again be darkened.

52  né quantunque perdeo l'antica matre,
53  valse a le guance nette di rugiada
54  che, lagrimando, non tornasser atre.

55  "Dante, because Virgilius has departed
56  Do not weep yet, do not weep yet awhile;
57  For by another sword thou need'st must weep."

55  “Dante, perché Virgilio se ne vada,
56  non pianger anco, non piangere ancora;
57  ché pianger ti conven per altra spada.”

58  E'en as an admiral, who on poop and prow
59  Comes to behold the people that are working
60  In other ships, and cheers them to well-doing,

58  Quasi ammiraglio che in poppa e in prora
59  viene a veder la gente che ministra
60  per li altri legni, e a ben far l'incora;

61  Upon the left hand border of the car,
62  When at the sound I turned of my own name,
63  Which of necessity is here recorded,

61  in su la sponda del carro sinistra,
62  quando mi volsi al suon del nome mio,
63  che di necessità qui si registra,

64  I saw the Lady, who erewhile appeared
65  Veiled underneath the angelic festival,
66  Direct her eyes to me across the river.

64  vidi la donna che pria m'appario
65  velata sotto l'angelica festa,
66  drizzar li occhi ver' me di qua dal rio.

67  Although the veil, that from her head descended,
68  Encircled with the foliage of Minerva,
69  Did not permit her to appear distinctly,

67  Tutto che 'l vel che le scendea di testa,
68  cerchiato de le fronde di Minerva,
69  non la lasciasse parer manifesta,

70  In attitude still royally majestic
71  Continued she, like unto one who speaks,
72  And keeps his warmest utterance in reserve:

70  regalmente ne l'atto ancor proterva
71  continüò come colui che dice
72  e 'l più caldo parlar dietro reserva:

73  "Look at me well; in sooth I'm Beatrice!
74  How didst thou deign to come unto the Mountain?
75  Didst thou not know that man is happy here?"

73  “Guardaci ben! Ben son, ben son Beatrice.
74  Come degnasti d'accedere al monte?
75  non sapei tu che qui è l'uom felice?”

76  Mine eyes fell downward into the clear fountain,
77  But, seeing myself therein, I sought the grass,
78  So great a shame did weigh my forehead down.

76  Li occhi mi cadder giù nel chiaro fonte;
77  ma veggendomi in esso, i trassi a l'erba,
78  tanta vergogna mi gravò la fronte.

79  As to the son the mother seems superb,
80  So she appeared to me; for somewhat bitter
81  Tasteth the savour of severe compassion.

79  Così la madre al figlio par superba,
80  com' ella parve a me; perché d'amaro
81  sente il sapor de la pietade acerba.

82  Silent became she, and the Angels sang
83  Suddenly, "In te, Domine, speravi:"
84  But beyond 'pedes meos' did not pass.

82  Ella si tacque; e li angeli cantaro
83  di sùbito “In te, Domine, speravi”;
84  ma oltre “pedes meos” non passaro.

85  Even as the snow among the living rafters
86  Upon the back of Italy congeals,
87  Blown on and drifted by Sclavonian winds,

85  Sì come neve tra le vive travi
86  per lo dosso d'Italia si congela,
87  soffiata e stretta da li venti schiavi,

88  And then, dissolving, trickles through itself
89  Whene'er the land that loses shadow breathes,
90  So that it seems a fire that melts a taper;

88  poi, liquefatta, in sé stessa trapela,
89  pur che la terra che perde ombra spiri,
90  sì che par foco fonder la candela;

91  E'en thus was I without a tear or sigh,
92  Before the song of those who sing for ever
93  After the music of the eternal spheres.

91  così fui sanza lagrime e sospiri
92  anzi 'l cantar di quei che notan sempre
93  dietro a le note de li etterni giri;

94  But when I heard in their sweet melodies
95  Compassion for me, more than had they said,
96  "O wherefore, lady, dost thou thus upbraid him?"

94  ma poi che 'ntesi ne le dolci tempre
95  lor compartire a me, par che se detto
96  avesser: “Donna, perché sì lo stempre?”

97  The ice, that was about my heart congealed,
98  To air and water changed, and in my anguish
99  Through mouth and eyes came gushing from my breast.

97  lo gel che m'era intorno al cor ristretto,
98  spirito e acqua fessi, e con angoscia
99  de la bocca e de li occhi uscì del petto.

100  She, on the right-hand border of the car
101  Still firmly standing, to those holy beings
102  Thus her discourse directed afterwards:

100  Ella, pur ferma in su la detta coscia
101  del carro stando, a le sustanze pie
102  volse le sue parole così poscia:

103  "Ye keep your watch in the eternal day,
104  So that nor night nor sleep can steal from you
105  One step the ages make upon their path;

103  “Voi vigilate ne l'etterno die,
104  sì che notte né sonno a voi non fura
105  passo che faccia il secol per sue vie;

106  Therefore my answer is with greater care,
107  That he may hear me who is weeping yonder,
108  So that the sin and dole be of one measure.

106  onde la mia risposta è con più cura
107  che m'intenda colui che di là piagne,
108  perché sia colpa e duol d'una misura.

109  Not only by the work of those great wheels,
110  That destine every seed unto some end,
111  According as the stars are in conjunction,

109  Non pur per ovra de le rote magne,
110  che drizzan ciascun seme ad alcun fine
111  secondo che le stelle son compagne,

112  But by the largess of celestial graces,
113  Which have such lofty vapours for their rain
114  That near to them our sight approaches not,

112  ma per larghezza di grazie divine,
113  che sì alti vapori hanno a lor piova,
114  che nostre viste là non van vicine,

115  Such had this man become in his new life
116  Potentially, that every righteous habit
117  Would have made admirable proof in him;

115  questi fu tal ne la sua vita nova
116  virtüalmente, ch'ogne abito destro
117  fatto averebbe in lui mirabil prova.
118  But so much more malignant and more savage
119  Becomes the land untilled and with bad seed,
120  The more good earthly vigour it possesses.

118  Ma tanto più maligno e più silvestro
119  si fa 'l terren col mal seme e non cólto,
120  quant' elli ha più di buon vigor terrestro.

121  Some time did I sustain him with my look;
122  Revealing unto him my youthful eyes,
123  I led him with me turned in the right way.

121  Alcun tempo il sostenni col mio volto:
122  mostrando li occhi giovanetti a lui,
123  meco il menava in dritta parte vòlto.

124  As soon as ever of my second age
125  I was upon the threshold and changed life,
126  Himself from me he took and gave to others.

124  Sì tosto come in su la soglia fui
125  di mia seconda etade e mutai vita,
126  questi si tolse a me, e diessi altrui.

127  When from the flesh to spirit I ascended,
128  And beauty and virtue were in me increased,
129  I was to him less dear and less delightful;

127  Quando di carne a spirto era salita,
128  e bellezza e virtù cresciuta m'era,
129  fu' io a lui men cara e men gradita;

130  And into ways untrue he turned his steps,
131  Pursuing the false images of good,
132  That never any promises fulfil;

130  e volse i passi suoi per via non vera,
131  imagini di ben seguendo false,
132  che nulla promession rendono intera.

133  Nor prayer for inspiration me availed,
134  By means of which in dreams and otherwise
135  I called him back, so little did he heed them.

133  Né l'impetrare ispirazion mi valse,
134  con le quali e in sogno e altrimenti
135  lo rivocai: sì poco a lui ne calse!

136  So low he fell, that all appliances
137  For his salvation were already short,
138  Save showing him the people of perdition.

136  Tanto giù cadde, che tutti argomenti
137  a la salute sua eran già corti,
138  fuor che mostrarli le perdute genti.

139  For this I visited the gates of death,
140  And unto him, who so far up has led him,
141  My intercessions were with weeping borne.

139  Per questo visitai l'uscio d'i morti,
140  e a colui che l'ha qua sù condotto,
141  li preghi miei, piangendo, furon porti.

142  God's lofty fiat would be violated,
143  If Lethe should be passed, and if such viands
144  Should tasted be, withouten any scot

142  Alto fato di Dio sarebbe rotto,
143  se Letè si passasse e tal vivanda
144  fosse gustata sanza alcuno scotto

145  Of penitence, that gushes forth in tears."

145  di pentimento che lagrime spanda.”

Canto XXXI
Who could Beatrice be to us?  If not the highest form of embodied exultation that we have ever experienced.  Her confrontation in this canto brings the terrible realization that at some point in our spiritual development is the question "Why, if we have ever had such an experience, would we ever gravitate back to those Hell states that the Commedia so vividly describes in the Inferno and also in the Purgatorio?"  There is some question of identity here, which, if we recall (and recollection itself is made treacherous in this canto), has been such an issue throughout the poem.  Naming, identifying, vilifying, praising, fame and obscurity, these have been the major themes and the dominating modus operandi of the poem, and now we see that as the spirit in the body and beyond it begins to express itself, its light overwhelms all of these shadowy remembrances, and whatever this thing called Self or identity is, it has consistently and tragically chosen lesser and darker expressions, it has corrupted its substance by a willful gluttony of the moment, which, no matter how turgidly poisonous, is devoured, and the being grows more obese, and more opaque, remembering only these Mayaesque distortions, and forgetting the clear light of that exultation.  If we have read the Tibetan Bardo Thodol, we should be familiar with this pattern, how the bright light of pure spirit overwhelms, and is rejected in favor of the dull, smokiness of these suffering states.  How then do we escape from this predicament, this death-shroud we have woven of our own skin?  This canto presents Dante's solution to this dilemma, and the question we have to ask is this: Does Dante's solution for himself hold for us too?  The question presented in this canto as some kind of visionary theology based upon confession, contrition, and satisfaction quite transcends any pat theological solution.  How, in the name of Heaven or of whatever each reader holds most dear, are we to experience our regrets, ego-puffing, self-naming and self-definitions, and how is such a re-collection of all our wayward disparate acts to be accomplished, so that we may be purged of our illusions, and be free and innocent enough to be baptized once again in exultation?  The aspirant in the poem, now on his own, abandoned by all guides and protectors, is being de-selved by awe, beauty, confusion, grief, fear, desire, and most of all by such a dazzling of lights that he begins to decohere at the onslaught, this decoherence accomplished by a double kind of drowning, one in floods of tears, and the other in a river of forgetfulness.  If I watch little children who have yet to be damaged by botched parenting and social malversations, I see that they freely alternate between what might be called the extremes of releasing emotions: tears and laughter.  There is zest in both, and in both a sort of cleansing of the emotional palette, so that in the next instant, the miracle of creation can be presented afresh, and an Eden of bliss, which is the default state of innocence, can be experienced again in all its glory as if for the first time.  The miracle of this poem is that Dante has found a way to present this ever-wondrous world or language and spirit, language as spirit, as an ongoing source of renewed splendor, even when the subject matter delves into the most atrocious aspects of existence.  The aspirant Dante as a protagonist of his own poem is an emotional innocent.  Throughout all the canticles, he does not suppress his feelings, and is like a child asking why? why?, not only for the sake of whatever answer is given, but for the reassurance of connection.  He never stops being that innocent child, and for all his missteps, and misunderstandings, there is in him a willingness to embrace experience as a source of exaltation, a source, so often as tears, but tears with a cleansing purpose.  And now as we enter these parts of the poem, where the recompense of joy and laughter are to be experienced, if we have faithfully followed the aspirant's progress, and have, not in some remote scholarly way, but in the way of rapport, which all children have with those elders around them through the operation of the brain's mirror neurons, we too are dazzled, we too have prepared ourselves to re-enter this state of prelapsarian innocence ... and not only that ... for this state is only a seed-state ... but we are also prepared to embark upon that course of development that we would have been able to follow if exultation and not fear, anger, grief, desire for that which damages, selfishness, pride, sloth, indecisiveness and all the other torments that mortal flesh is heir to had not collectively been the pole star of our life's journey.  Blot out that black star, and follow the bright star of beauteous, beatific love, and how different our lives would have been?  That bright star, for Dante is Beatrice, and somewhere, for most of us, there is a Beatrice moment, a moment that might have been the seed from which we might have grown a life of bliss, but instead, through cultural pressures, survival issues, through fear and shame, chose the darker path.  Too many modern readers have been stuck in Dante's Inferno, not even delving into the lessons of Purgatory, let alone the wonders of Paradise, these latter seeming to be boring, or irrelevant to their own experience.  But one could say, that the Dante who makes Dante great, and what he is really trying to express for us, starts after the end of his swim through and swallowing of the waters of Lethe.  Everything up to now has been preamble.  Whatever is to come is what all of the rest of this aesthetic and spiritual journey has been preparing us to receive.  

1  "O thou who art beyond the sacred river,"
2  Turning to me the point of her discourse,
3  That edgewise even had seemed to me so keen,

1  “O tu che se' di là dal fiume sacro,”
2  volgendo suo parlare a me per punta,
3  che pur per taglio m'era paruto acro,

4  She recommenced, continuing without pause,
5  "Say, say if this be true; to such a charge,
6  Thy own confession needs must be conjoined."

4  ricominciò, seguendo sanza cunta,
5  “dì, dì se questo è vero; a tanta accusa
6  tua confession conviene esser congiunta.”

7  My faculties were in so great confusion,
8  That the voice moved, but sooner was extinct
9  Than by its organs it was set at large.

7  Era la mia virtù tanto confusa,
8  che la voce si mosse, e pria si spense
9  che da li organi suoi fosse dischiusa.

10  Awhile she waited; then she said: "What thinkest?
11  Answer me; for the mournful memories
12  In thee not yet are by the waters injured."

10  Poco sofferse; poi disse: “Che pense?
11  Rispondi a me; ché le memorie triste
12  in te non sono ancor da l'acqua offense.”

13  Confusion and dismay together mingled
14  Forced such a Yes! from out my mouth, that sight
15  Was needful to the understanding of it.

13  Confusione e paura insieme miste
14  mi pinsero un tal “sì” fuor de la bocca,
15  al quale intender fuor mestier le viste.

16  Even as a cross-bow breaks, when 'tis discharged
17  Too tensely drawn the bowstring and the bow,
18  And with less force the arrow hits the mark,

16  Come balestro frange, quando scocca
17  da troppa tesa, la sua corda e l'arco,
18   e con men foga l'asta il segno tocca,

19  So I gave way beneath that heavy burden,
20  Outpouring in a torrent tears and sighs,
21  And the voice flagged upon its passage forth.

19  sì scoppia' io sottesso grave carco,
20  fuori sgorgando lagrime e sospiri,
21  e la voce allentò per lo suo varco. 
22  Whence she to me: "In those desires of mine
23  Which led thee to the loving of that good,
24  Beyond which there is nothing to aspire to,

22  Ond' ella a me: “Per entro i mie' disiri,
23  che ti menavano ad amar lo bene
24  di là dal qual non è a che s'aspiri 

25  What trenches lying traverse or what chains
26  Didst thou discover, that of passing onward
27  Thou shouldst have thus despoiled thee of the hope?

25  quai fossi attraversati o quai catene
26  trovasti, per che del passare innanzi
27  dovessiti così spogliar la spene?

28  And what allurements or what vantages
29  Upon the forehead of the others showed,
30  That thou shouldst turn thy footsteps unto them?"

28  E quali agevolezze o quali avanzi
29  ne la fronte de li altri si mostraro,
30  per che dovessi lor passeggiare anzi?”

31  After the heaving of a bitter sigh,
32  Hardly had I the voice to make response,
33  And with fatigue my lips did fashion it.

31  Dopo la tratta d'un sospiro amaro,
32 a pena ebbi la voce che rispuose,
33  e le labbra a fatica la formaro.

34  Weeping I said: "The things that present were
35  With their false pleasure turned aside my steps,
36  Soon as your countenance concealed itself."

34  Piangendo dissi: “Le presenti cose
35  col falso lor piacer volser miei passi,
36  tosto che 'l vostro viso si nascose.”

37  And she: "Shouldst thou be silent, or deny
38  What thou confessest, not less manifest
39  Would be thy fault, by such a Judge 'tis known.


37  Ed ella: “Se tacessi o se negassi
38  ciò che confessi, non fora men nota
39  la colpa tua: da tal giudice sassi!

40  But when from one's own cheeks comes bursting forth
41  The accusal of the sin, in our tribunal
42  Against the edge the wheel doth turn itself.

40  Ma quando scoppia de la propria gota
41  l'accusa del peccato, in nostra corte
42  rivolge sé contra 'l taglio la rota.

43  But still, that thou mayst feel a greater shame
44  For thy transgression, and another time
45  Hearing the Sirens thou mayst be more strong,

43  Tuttavia, perché mo vergogna porte
44  del tuo errore, e perché altra volta,
45  udendo le serene, sie più forte,

46  Cast down the seed of weeping and attend;
47  So shalt thou hear, how in an opposite way
48  My buried flesh should have directed thee.

46  pon giù il seme del piangere e ascolta:
47  sì udirai come in contraria parte
48  mover dovieti mia carne sepolta.

49  Never to thee presented art or nature
50  Pleasure so great as the fair limbs wherein
51  I was enclosed, which scattered are in earth.

49  Mai non t'appresentò natura o arte
50  piacer, quanto le belle membra in ch'io
51  rinchiusa fui, e che so' 'n terra sparte;

52  And if the highest pleasure thus did fail thee
53  By reason of my death, what mortal thing
54  Should then have drawn thee into its desire?

52  e se 'l sommo piacer sì ti fallio
53  per la mia morte, qual cosa mortale
54  dovea poi trarre te nel suo disio?

55  Thou oughtest verily at the first shaft
56  Of things fallacious to have risen up
57  To follow me, who was no longer such.

55  Ben ti dovevi, per lo primo strale
56  de le cose fallaci, levar suso
57  di retro a me che non era più tale.

58  Thou oughtest not to have stooped thy pinions downward
59  To wait for further blows, or little girl,
60  Or other vanity of such brief use.

58  Non ti dovea gravar le penne in giuso,
59  ad aspettar più colpo, o pargoletta
60  o altra novità con sì breve uso.

61  The callow birdlet waits for two or three,
62  But to the eyes of those already fledged,
63  In vain the net is spread or shaft is shot."

61  Novo augelletto due o tre aspetta;
62  ma dinanzi da li occhi d'i pennuti
63  rete si spiega indarno o si saetta.”

64  Even as children silent in their shame
65  Stand listening with their eyes upon the ground,
66  And conscious of their fault, and penitent;

64  Quali fanciulli, vergognando, muti
65  con li occhi a terra stannosi, ascoltando
66  e sé riconoscendo e ripentuti,

67  So was I standing; and she said: "If thou
68  In hearing sufferest pain, lift up thy beard
69  And thou shalt feel a greater pain in seeing."

67  tal mi stav' io; ed ella disse: “Quando
68  per udir se' dolente, alza la barba,
69  e prenderai più doglia riguardando.”
70  With less resistance is a robust holm
71  Uprooted, either by a native wind
72  Or else by that from regions of Iarbas,

70  Con men di resistenza si dibarba
71  robusto cerro, o vero al nostral vento
72  o vero a quel de la terra di Iarba,

73  Than I upraised at her command my chin;
74  And when she by the beard the face demanded,
75  Well I perceived the venom of her meaning.

73  ch'io non levai al suo comando il mento;
74  e quando per la barba il viso chiese,
75  ben conobbi il velen de l'argomento.

76  And as my countenance was lifted up,
77  Mine eye perceived those creatures beautiful
78  Had rested from the strewing of the flowers;

76  E come la mia faccia si distese,
77  posarsi quelle prime creature
78  da loro aspersïon l'occhio comprese;

79  And, still but little reassured, mine eyes
80  Saw Beatrice turned round towards the monster,
81  That is one person only in two natures.

79  e le mie luci, ancor poco sicure,
80  vider Beatrice volta in su la fiera
81  ch'è sola una persona in due nature.
 
82  Beneath her veil, beyond the margent green,
83  She seemed to me far more her ancient self
84  To excel, than others here, when she was here.

82  Sotto 'l suo velo e oltre la rivera
82  vincer pariemi più sé stessa antica,
83  vincer che l'altre qui, quand' ella c'era.

85  So pricked me then the thorn of penitence,
86  That of all other things the one which turned me
87  Most to its love became the most my foe.

85  Di penter sì mi punse ivi l'ortica,
86  che di tutte altre cose qual mi torse
87  più nel suo amor, più mi si fé nemica.

88  Such self-conviction stung me at the heart
89  O'erpowered I fell, and what I then became
90  She knoweth who had furnished me the cause.

88  Tanta riconoscenza il cor mi morse,
89  ch'io caddi vinto; e quale allora femmi,
90  salsi colei che la cagion mi porse.

91  Then, when the heart restored my outward sense,
92  The lady I had found alone, above me
93  I saw, and she was saying, "Hold me, hold me."

91  Poi, quando il cor virtù di fuor rendemmi,
92  la donna ch'io avea trovata sola
93  sopra me vidi, e dicea: “Tiemmi, tiemmi!”

94  Up to my throat she in the stream had drawn me,
95  And, dragging me behind her, she was moving
96  Upon the water lightly as a shuttle.

94  Tratto m'avea nel fiume infin la gola,
95  e tirandosi me dietro sen giva
96  sovresso l'acqua lieve come scola.

97  When I was near unto the blessed shore,
98  "Asperges me," I heard so sweetly sung,
99  Remember it I cannot, much less write it.

97  Quando fui presso a la beata riva,
98  “Asperges me” sì dolcemente udissi,
99  che nol so rimembrar, non ch'io lo scriva.

100  The beautiful lady opened wide her arms,
101  Embraced my head, and plunged me underneath,
102  Where I was forced to swallow of the water.

100  La bella donna ne le braccia aprissi;
101  abbracciommi la testa e mi sommerse
102  ove convenne ch'io l'acqua inghiottissi.

103  Then forth she drew me, and all dripping brought
104  Into the dance of the four beautiful,
105  And each one with her arm did cover me.

103  Indi mi tolse, e bagnato m'offerse
104  dentro a la danza de le quattro belle;
105  e ciascuna del braccio mi coperse.

106  'We here are Nymphs, and in the Heaven are stars;
107  Ere Beatrice descended to the world,
108  We as her handmaids were appointed her.

106  “Noi siam qui ninfe e nel ciel siamo stelle;
107  pria che Beatrice discendesse al mondo,
108  fummo ordinate a lei per sue ancelle.
 
109  We'll lead thee to her eyes; but for the pleasant
110  Light that within them is, shall sharpen thine
111  The three beyond, who more profoundly look.'

109  Merrenti a li occhi suoi; ma nel giocondo
110  lume ch'è dentro aguzzeranno i tuoi
111  le tre di là, che miran più profondo.”

112  Thus singing they began; and afterwards
113  Unto the Griffin's breast they led me with them,
114  Where Beatrice was standing, turned towards us.

112  Così cantando cominciaro; e poi
113  al petto del grifon seco menarmi,
114  ove Beatrice stava volta a noi.

115  "See that thou dost not spare thine eyes," they said;
116  "Before the emeralds have we stationed thee,
117  Whence Love aforetime drew for thee his weapons."

115  Disser: “Fa che le viste non risparmi;
116  posto t'avem dinanzi a li smeraldi
117  ond' Amor già ti trasse le sue armi.”

118  A thousand longings, hotter than the flame,
119  Fastened mine eyes upon those eyes relucent,
120  That still upon the Griffin steadfast stayed.

118  Mille disiri più che fiamma caldi
119  strinsermi li occhi a li occhi rilucenti,
120  che pur sopra 'l grifone stavan saldi.

121  As in a glass the sun, not otherwise
122  Within them was the twofold monster shining,
123  Now with the one, now with the other nature.

121  Come in lo specchio il sol, non altrimenti
122  la doppia fiera dentro vi raggiava,
123  or con altri, or con altri reggimenti.

124  Think, Reader, if within myself I marvelled,
125  When I beheld the thing itself stand still,
126  And in its image it transformed itself.

124  Pensa, lettor, s'io mi maravigliava,
125  quando vedea la cosa in sé star queta,
126  e ne l'idolo suo si trasmutava.

127  While with amazement filled and jubilant,
128  My soul was tasting of the food, that while
129  It satisfies us makes us hunger for it,

127  Mentre che piena di stupore e lieta
128  l'anima mia gustava di quel cibo
129  che, saziando di sé, di sé asseta,

130  Themselves revealing of the highest rank
131  In bearing, did the other three advance,
132  Singing to their angelic saraband.

130  sé dimostrando di più alto tribo
131  ne li atti, l'altre tre si fero avanti,
132  danzando al loro angelico caribo.

133  "Turn, Beatrice, O turn thy holy eyes,"
134  Such was their song, "unto thy faithful one,
135  Who has to see thee ta'en so many steps.

133  “Volgi, Beatrice, volgi li occhi santi,”
134  era la sua canzone, “al tuo fedele
135  che, per vederti, ha mossi passi tanti!

136  In grace do us the grace that thou unveil
137  Thy face to him, so that he may discern
138  The second beauty which thou dost conceal."

136  Per grazia fa noi grazia che disvele
137  a lui la bocca tua, sì che discerna
138  la seconda bellezza che tu cele.”

139  O splendour of the living light eternal!
140  Who underneath the shadow of Parnassus
141  Has grown so pale, or drunk so at its cistern,

139  O isplendor di viva luce etterna,
140  chi palido si fece sotto l'ombra
141  sì di Parnaso, o bevve in sua cisterna,

142  He would not seem to have his mind encumbered
143  Striving to paint thee as thou didst appear,
144  Where the harmonious heaven o'ershadowed thee,

142  che non paresse aver la mente ingombra,
143  tentando a render te qual tu paresti
144  là dove armonizzando il ciel t'adombra,

145  quando ne l'aere aperto ti solvesti?

145  When in the open air thou didst unveil?

Canto XXXII
In Canto XXXII of the Purgatorio, one has the realization that we are moving into a domain, wherein Dante, of all poets, displays his special gift of rendering as narrative and quasi-visualizable allegories certain physiological and metaphysical states, states experienced in the living body as awe, bliss, terror or agony, or, even more astonishingly, as amalgamated intensities colored with all of these states simultaneously.  I think contemporary readers are particularly bored by allegory, and this chiefly because of that Freudian psychological maneuver called displacement.  That which is too intense, too traumatic, or as we see here, too joyful, is represented psychologically as something that lessens and also often obscures  — or perhaps we should make a new verb here, and say "obscurates".  The displacement is something we can emotionally handle, as the allegorical meaning behind the emotion moves the energy of vision and of the heart into the cooler domain of the intellect.  The overwhelming mystery that as vision must remain overwhelming, is depotentiated — one might say "tamed" — by the intellect's ability to decipher a mysterious code, as it does the mysterious shapes of letters on the page, or the small mouth movements of a language's sounded syllables, into that which is manipulable.  Think here of the inception of knowledge for a small child, who begins to understand her or his descent into the three-dimensions of space and the one of time, by manipulating small objects — blocks, or puzzle pieces, or cutout letters — with the hand.  One sees in this child, the almost inconceivable level of concentration required to subdue the inchoate wonders of the world into that which can be grasped.  So it is in the Commedia, in these sections where allegory arises as vision.  Commentators over the centuries have done all that they can to depotentiate these visions as meanings, representations of vast areas of transpersonal, historical experience, as is the case here, of the so-ascribed history of the Church up to Dante's time.  This meaning, which may well have been what Dante's conscious mind was aiming for, and which served to placate the hidden anxieties of his contemporaries, has, for us, in the early 21st Century, become far too vapid to have the impact required to move us, and we, like Dante, towards the end of this canto, are put to sleep, a particularly deep, and dreamless sleep, which is essentially a dark gap in space/time, wherein the psyche can assimilate the enormity of its experience.  I find it particularly amazing that Dante, who as a character in his own poem, understood that the psyche exists on many levels, which, like Russian dolls, enclose one another, dreams expanding inside of dreams, visions and metaphors changing shape and meaning, as the reader penetrates ever more deeply into the truly epic quality of the poem.  If we really want to experience this poem, we cannot rest in the religious symbolism of the early 14th Century.  We must, as Dante did, become the wondering and wandering spiritual aspirant.  We have entered a strange, and marvelous country, and with Coleridge's "willing suspension of disbelief," and also, I think, a deliberate severing, for a time, of the intellect's need to depotentiate through its activity of offering comforting explanations, we must make ourselves over into those little children, encountering for the first time the problem of making the miraculous manipulable.

I did not want to write what I am now writing.  It seems to me that there is an organic quality to the Commedia which obliges one to treat it as a living thing, a creature, not unlike the Griffin in this canto of a hybrid nature, but one which is slowly surrounding you, digesting you as you read.  Your intellectual body, and any sheathing or shell it has erected to protect its own vulnerabilities is the first layer that is assimilated.  The immense commentary tradition of serious scholars, who have spent their lives studying this text, discussing it, engaging in explorations and controversies, is ample testimony to this process.  But perhaps these intellectual endeavors mask even deeper processes, those that could be called the dissolution of the reader's morality/mortality body.  If there is a deeper aspect to the physical self, to life on Earth, I don't know what it is, but Dante seems to.  And from this deeper place, this place of the individual soul and the universal spirit, he gets at you.  I dreamt that I was listening to a lecture on Dante given by a prestigious scholar from the most prestigious university.  After the lecture, I made some comment to the effect that there was a way in which the academic treatment of Dante could turn one's reading into something almost as trivial as a "pastime".  The scholar became incensed.  He attacked me, essentially accusing me of cowardice because as an academic outsider I had not submitted myself and my ideas to the merciless gauntlet of judgement by experts, and moreover, I had refused, even when invited, to be included in that company.  I protested that I had never received or ever knew about any such invitations ... and then I awakened much disturbed, and stricken with the doubts of the autodidact.  Undoubtedly my comments on the text, not being subject to any correction or review, have covered old ground, have promulgated misreadings, have made innumerable errors in readings and in judgement, and have been saturated by the arrogance which infects one when one is protected from scrutiny and safe in the privacy of one's own mind.  The huge debt that I owe to the scholars and translators of this work cannot be adequately acknowledged.  The meanings that Dante himself might have ascribed to the allegories presented in this canto, with the chariot as the historical church, the griffin as Christ, the wood of chariot's hitch, as the cross, I have rather too cavalierly dismissed, and thereby robbed the work of its immense historical significance.  I simply have been too ignorant or too timid to take on the task of considering the ponderous question of the entirety of Christianity.  My own spiritual eclecticism, knowing some smattering of other religious traditions — Hinduism, Islam, Buddhism, Taoism, Shamanism, etc. — plus some generalized tidbits of psychology and brain science have made of me a perpetual dilettante, and the dream, drove that home for me, giving me an upset that I now have to live with, a splinter of that true cross perhaps, which will not be assimilated, and which will unceasingly fester and bleed, or, and this is more likely, will be insulated by a callus, a cynicism, and I will feel a little less, and hardened in my own opinions, remain, to use Singleton's term for Dante, the aspirant, at this stage: Justified.  I have always understood Justice and Injustice as Blakean opposites, and that there would be no need for justice, if, returning to our prelapsarian condition of innocence, we no longer committed injustices.  In such an Edenic state, there would be no weight of wrong to counterbalance in those iconic scales.  I had not considered the Law —  that mortality itself, and one's spiritual assumption of a physical body in 3D space/time is subject to certain physical constants, the only escape from which is to enter into some poetic/imaginative realm, shucking the shell of the body, and embracing what seems unreal, as the only real.  It comes as a shock to realize that to be in a body, to want in a sense, to live forever in bodily bliss, is a set of blinders that obscures the true import of this poem.  When Dante, the protagonist of his own poetic self, realizes this in the Purgatorio's Canto XXXI, he dissolves into tears of shame and remorse, and here, in Canto XXXII, he passes out in a dreamless sleep.  What indeed is the true cost of transcendence?  Everything.  Tears are this poem's digestive juices, and the total oblivion of assimilation is this great creature's appetite.  Assimilation, transformation, and elimination, these are the constants of mortal life, and they take place in an ordered cycle, the wheels of the chariot of a church that sweeps me — and all serious readers of the poem — along on this vanity project.  A voice with prestigious authority tells me: Nobody writes a diary without the expectation that it will be read, even if that reader is only his own future self.  I am sorry, for this, because it seems as if I am doomed to go on with my audacities and sweeping generalizations.  I can't stop, the momentum of my fall is just too great.  I would to God that I might have one of those transforming visions which are the substance of this work.  I am tired of the me who only reads Dante.  I want to be him.   

1  So steadfast and attentive were mine eyes
2  In satisfying their decennial thirst,
3  That all my other senses were extinct,

1  Tant' eran li occhi miei fissi e attenti
2  a disbramarsi la decenne sete,
3  che li altri sensi m'eran tutti spenti.

4  And upon this side and on that they had
5  Walls of indifference, so the holy smile
6  Drew them unto itself with the old net

4  Ed essi quinci e quindi avien parete
5  di non caler–così lo santo riso
6  a sé traéli con l'antica rete!–;

7  When forcibly my sight was turned away
8  Towards my left hand by those goddesses,
9  Because I heard from them a "Too intently!"

7  quando per forza mi fu vòlto il viso
8  ver' la sinistra mia da quelle dee,
9  perch' io udi' da loro un “Troppo fiso!”

10  And that condition of the sight which is
11  In eyes but lately smitten by the sun
12  Bereft me of my vision some short while;

10  e la disposizion ch'a veder èe
11  ne li occhi pur testé dal sol percossi,
12  sanza la vista alquanto esser mi fée.

13  But to the less when sight re-shaped itself,
14  I say the less in reference to the greater
15  Splendour from which perforce I had withdrawn,

13  Ma poi ch'al poco il viso riformossi
14  (e dico “al poco” per rispetto al molto
15  sensibile onde a forza mi rimossi),

16  I saw upon its right wing wheeled about
17  The glorious host returning with the sun
18  And with the sevenfold flames upon their faces.

16  vidi 'n sul braccio destro esser rivolto
17  lo glorïoso essercito, e tornarsi
18  col sole e con le sette fiamme al volto.

19  As underneath its shields, to save itself,
20  A squadron turns, and with its banner wheels,
21  Before the whole thereof can change its front,

19  Come sotto li scudi per salvarsi
20  volgesi schiera, e sé gira col segno,
21  prima che possa tutta in sé mutarsi;

22  That soldiery of the celestial kingdom
23  Which marched in the advance had wholly passed us
24  Before the chariot had turned its pole.

22  quella milizia del celeste regno
23  che procedeva, tutta trapassonne
24  pria che piegasse il carro il primo legno.

25  Then to the wheels the maidens turned themselves,
26  And the Griffin moved his burden benedight,
27  But so that not a feather of him fluttered.

25  Indi a le rote si tornar le donne,
26  e 'l grifon mosse il benedetto carco
27  sì, che però nulla penna crollonne.

28  The lady fair who drew me through the ford
29  Followed with Statius and myself the wheel
30  Which made its orbit with the lesser arc.

28  La bella donna che mi trasse al varco
29  e Stazio e io seguitavam la rota
30  che fé l'orbita sua con minore arco.
31  So passing through the lofty forest, vacant
32  By fault of her who in the serpent trusted,
33  Angelic music made our steps keep time.
31  Sì passeggiando l'alta selva vòta,
32  colpa di quella ch'al serpente crese,
33  temprava i passi un'angelica nota.
34  Perchance as great a space had in three flights
35  An arrow loosened from the string o'erpassed,
36  As we had moved when Beatrice descended.
34  Forse in tre voli tanto spazio prese
35  disfrenata saetta, quanto eramo
36  rimossi, quando Bëatrice scese.
37  I heard them murmur altogether, "Adam!"
38  Then circled they about a tree despoiled
39  Of blooms and other leafage on each bough.
37  Io senti' mormorare a tutti “Adamo”;
38  poi cerchiaro una pianta dispogliata
39  di foglie e d'altra fronda in ciascun ramo.
40  Its tresses, which so much the more dilate
41  As higher they ascend, had been by Indians
42  Among their forests marvelled at for height.
40  La coma sua, che tanto si dilata
41  più quanto più è sù, fora da l'Indi
42  ne' boschi lor per altezza ammirata.
43  "Blessed art thou, O Griffin, who dost not
44  Pluck with thy beak these branches sweet to taste,
45  Since appetite by this was turned to evil."

43  “Beato se', grifon, che non discindi
 44  col becco d'esto legno dolce al gusto,
45  poscia che mal si torce il ventre quindi.”
46  After this fashion round the tree robust
47  The others shouted; and the twofold creature:
48  "Thus is preserved the seed of all the just."
46  Così dintorno a l'albero robusto
47  gridaron li altri; e l'animal binato:
48  “Sì si conserva il seme d'ogne giusto.”
49  And turning to the pole which he had dragged,
50  He drew it close beneath the widowed bough,
51  And what was of it unto it left bound.
49  E vòlto al temo ch'elli avea tirato,
50  trasselo al piè de la vedova frasca,
51  e quel di lei a lei lasciò legato.
52  In the same manner as our trees (when downward
53  Falls the great light, with that together mingled
54  Which after the celestial Lasca shines)
52  Come le nostre piante, quando casca
53  giù la gran luce mischiata con quella
54  che raggia dietro a la celeste lasca,

55  Begin to swell, and then renew themselves,
56  Each one with its own colour, ere the Sun
57  Harness his steeds beneath another star:

55  turgide fansi, e poi si rinovella
56  di suo color ciascuna, pria che 'l sole
57  giunga li suoi corsier sotto altra stella;
58  Less than of rose and more than violet
59  A hue disclosing, was renewed the tree
60  That had erewhile its boughs so desolate.
58  men che di rose e più che di vïole
59  colore aprendo, s'innovò la pianta,
60  che prima avea le ramora sì sole.

61  I never heard, nor here below is sung,
62  The hymn which afterward that people sang,
63  Nor did I bear the melody throughout.

61  Io non lo 'ntesi, né qui non si canta
62  l'inno che quella gente allor cantaro,
63  né la nota soffersi tutta quanta.

64  Had I the power to paint how fell asleep
65  Those eyes compassionless, of Syrinx hearing,
66  Those eyes to which more watching cost so dear,

64  S'io potessi ritrar come assonnaro
65  li occhi spietati udendo di Siringa,
66  li occhi a cui pur vegghiar costò sì caro;

67  Even as a painter who from model paints
68  I would portray how I was lulled asleep;
69  He may, who well can picture drowsihood.

67  come pintor che con essempro pinga,
68  disegnerei com' io m'addormentai;
69  ma qual vuol sia che l'assonnar ben finga.
70  Therefore I pass to what time I awoke,
71  And say a splendour rent from me the veil
72  Of slumber, and a calling: "Rise, what dost thou?"

70  Però trascorro a quando mi svegliai,
71  e dico ch'un splendor mi squarciò 'l velo
72  del sonno, e un chiamar: “Surgi: che fai?”

73  As to behold the apple-tree in blossom
74  Which makes the Angels greedy for its fruit,
75  And keeps perpetual bridals in the Heaven,

73  Quali a veder de' fioretti del melo
74  che del suo pome li angeli fa ghiotti
75  e perpetüe nozze fa nel cielo,

76  Peter and John and James conducted were,
77  And, overcome, recovered at the word
78  By which still greater slumbers have been broken,

76  Pietro e Giovanni e Iacopo condotti
77 e vinti, ritornaro a la parola
78 da la qual furon maggior sonni rotti,

79  And saw their school diminished by the loss
80  Not only of Elias, but of Moses,
81  And the apparel of their Master changed;

79  e videro scemata loro scuola
80  così di Moïsè come d'Elia,
81  e al maestro suo cangiata stola;

82  So I revived, and saw that piteous one
83  Above me standing, who had been conductress
84  Aforetime of my steps beside the river,

82  tal torna' io, e vidi quella pia
83  sovra me starsi che conducitrice
84  fu de' miei passi lungo 'l fiume pria.

85  And all in doubt I said, "Where's Beatrice?"
86  And she: "Behold her seated underneath
87  The leafage new, upon the root of it.

85  E tutto in dubbio dissi: “Ov' è Beatrice?”
86  Ond' ella: “Vedi lei sotto la fronda
87  nova sedere in su la sua radice.

88  Behold the company that circles her;
89  The rest behind the Griffin are ascending
90  With more melodious song, and more profound."

88  Vedi la compagnia che la circonda:
89  li altri dopo 'l grifon sen vanno suso
90  con più dolce canzone e più profonda.”

91  And if her speech were more diffuse I know not,
92  Because already in my sight was she
93  Who from the hearing of aught else had shut me.

91  E se più fu lo suo parlar diffuso,
92  non so, però che già ne li occhi m'era
93  quella ch'ad altro intender m'avea chiuso.

94  Alone she sat upon the very earth,
95  Left there as guardian of the chariot
96  Which I had seen the biform monster fasten.

94  Sola sedeasi in su la terra vera,
95  come guardia lasciata lì del plaustro
96  che legar vidi a la biforme fera.

97  Encircling her, a cloister made themselves
98  The seven Nymphs, with those lights in their hands
99  Which are secure from Aquilon and Auster.

97  In cerchio le facevan di sé claustro
98  le sette ninfe, con quei lumi in mano
99  che son sicuri d'Aquilone e d'Austro.

100  "Short while shalt thou be here a forester,
101  And thou shalt be with me for evermore
102  A citizen of that Rome where Christ is Roman.

100  “Qui sarai tu poco tempo silvano;
101  e sarai meco sanza fine cive
102  di quella Roma onde Cristo è romano

103  Therefore, for that world's good which liveth ill,
104  Fix on the car thine eyes, and what thou seest,
105  Having returned to earth, take heed thou write."

103  Però, in pro del mondo che mal vive,
104   al carro tieni or li occhi, e quel che vedi,
105  ritornato di là, fa che tu scrive.”

105  Thus Beatrice; and I, who at the feet
107  Of her commandments all devoted was,
108  My mind and eyes directed where she willed.

106  Così Beatrice; e io, che tutto ai piedi
107  d'i suoi comandamenti era divoto,
108  la mente e li occhi ov' ella volle diedi.

109  Never descended with so swift a motion
110  Fire from a heavy cloud, when it is raining
111  From out the region which is most remote,

109  Non scese mai con sì veloce moto
110  foco di spessa nube, quando piove
111  da quel confine che più va remoto,

112  As I beheld the bird of Jove descend
113  Down through the tree, rending away the bark,
114  As well as blossoms and the foliage new,

112  com' io vidi calar l'uccel di Giove
113  per l'alber giù, rompendo de la scorza,
114  non che d'i fiori e de le foglie nove;

115  And he with all his might the chariot smote,
116  Whereat it reeled, like vessel in a tempest
117  Tossed by the waves, now starboard and now larboard.
115  e ferì 'l carro di tutta sua forza;
116  ond' el piegò come nave in fortuna,
117  vinta da l'onda, or da poggia, or da orza.

118  Thereafter saw I leap into the body
119  Of the triumphal vehicle a Fox,
120  That seemed unfed with any wholesome food.


118  Poscia vidi avventarsi ne la cuna
119  del trïunfal veiculo una volpe
120  che d'ogne pasto buon parea digiuna;

121  But for his hideous sins upbraiding him,
122  My Lady put him to as swift a flight
123  As such a fleshless skeleton could bear.

121  ma, riprendendo lei di laide colpe,
122 la donna mia la volse in tanta futa
123  quanto sofferser l'ossa sanza polpe.

124  Then by the way that it before had come,
125  Into the chariot's chest I saw the Eagle
126  Descend, and leave it feathered with his plumes.

124  Poscia per indi ond' era pria venuta,
125  l'aguglia vidi scender giù ne l'arca
126  del carro e lasciar lei di sé pennuta;

127  And such as issues from a heart that mourns,
128  A voice from Heaven there issued, and it said:
129  "My little bark, how badly art thou freighted!"

127  e qual esce di cuor che si rammarca,
128  tal voce uscì del cielo e cotal disse:
129  “O navicella mia, com' mal se' carca!”

130  Methought, then, that the earth did yawn between
131  Both wheels, and I saw rise from it a Dragon,
132  Who through the chariot upward fixed his tail,

130  Poi parve a me che la terra s'aprisse
131  tr'ambo le ruote, e vidi uscirne un drago
132  che per lo carro sù la coda fisse;

133  And as a wasp that draweth back its sting,
134  Drawing unto himself his tail malign,
135  Drew out the floor, and went his way rejoicing.

133  e come vespa che ritragge l'ago,
134  a sé traendo la coda maligna,
135  trasse del fondo, e gissen vago vago.
136  That which remained behind, even as with grass
137  A fertile region, with the feathers, offered
138  Perhaps with pure intention and benign,

136  Quel che rimase, come da gramigna
137  vivace terra, da la piuma, offerta
138  forse con intenzion sana e benigna,

139  Reclothed itself, and with them were reclothed
140  The pole and both the wheels so speedily,
141  A sigh doth longer keep the lips apart.

139  si ricoperse, e funne ricoperta
140  e l'una e l'altra rota e 'l temo, in tanto
141  che più tiene un sospir la bocca aperta.

142  Transfigured thus the holy edifice
143  Thrust forward heads upon the parts of it,
144  Three on the pole and one at either corner.

142  Trasformato così 'l dificio santo
143  mise fuor teste per le parti sue,
144  tre sovra 'l temo e una in ciascun canto.

145  The first were horned like oxen; but the four
146  Had but a single horn upon the forehead;
147  A monster such had never yet been seen!

144  Le prime eran cornute come bue,
145  ma le quattro un sol corno avean per fronte:
146  simile mostro visto ancor non fue.

148  Firm as a rock upon a mountain high,
149  Seated upon it, there appeared to me
150  A shameless whore, with eyes swift glancing round,

148  Sicura, quasi rocca in alto monte,
149   seder sovresso una puttana sciolta
150   m'apparve con le ciglia intorno pronte;

151  And, as if not to have her taken from him,
152  Upright beside her I beheld a giant;
153  And ever and anon they kissed each other.

151  e come perché non li fosse tolta,
152  vidi di costa a lei dritto un gigante;
153  e basciavansi insieme alcuna volta.

154  But because she her wanton, roving eye
155  Turned upon me, her angry paramour
156  Did scourge her from her head unto her feet.

154  Ma perché l'occhio cupido e vagante
155  a me rivolse, quel feroce drudo
156  la flagellò dal capo infin le piante;

157  Then full of jealousy, and fierce with wrath,
158  He loosed the monster, and across the forest
159  Dragged it so far, he made of that alone

157  poi, di sospetto pieno e d'ira crudo,
158  disciolse il mostro, e trassel per la selva,
159   tanto che sol di lei mi fece scudo

160  A shield unto the whore and the strange beast.

160  a la puttana e a la nova belva.

Canto XXXIII
The first canto of the Inferno presented what we might call a psychic allegory of the three beasts which confront the aspirant and drive him back.  Here, the allegory is of the people, "gentes", an allegory of the collective nature of human kind, and if we were expecting a celebration, that is, some kind of graduation ceremony for the aspirant for having passed through purgatory, learned all of his moral lessons, and expiated himself from the seven deadly sins, we will be very much confused and disappointed by the darkness herein presented.  To be sure, this is a darkness of "art", of beautiful voices singing in three and four part harmonies, which is a far cry from the cacophonic howlings of the Inferno.  But the content of this art, what is communicated emotionally by this transcendent beauty, is grief.  Imagine, the final lesson of the soul, is grief for the human condition!  And not just any grief, but a grief that imagines, as we should have been aware through all of the first two canticles of the poem, a punishing correction, a judgement, in which those who have been the cause of suffering are made to suffer in kind for the deviations that they have fomented.  We should perhaps now be thinking of what justice might be in the absence of injustice.  In other words, is paradise only only feasible in contrast to the condition of Hell?  Dante's Purgatory's last gasp, begins with its guiding spirit's sorrowful suspiration and her terrible prophesy of God's vengeance.  But it does not end there.  It ends, as does the Inferno, with a vision of the stars.

Another word about allegory needs to be expressed here.  Commentators for more than eight centuries have been busy trying to ferret out just what these visionary figures are meant to express, and they've done a tremendous job of this too, if what we should be getting out of the poem is the view of a 14th century Christian vis à vis the movements of history and of the individual human psyche as it is embedded in the collective of the people.  For me, that is not enough.  I am not a 14th century Christian, and no reader alive today or who might confront this poem in the future, can ever be what Dante's historical self was.  I do not think this poem is a museum piece, or even something that should be studied and venerated solely for its influence on the culture we have inherited partly through its powerful influence down through the centuries.  Its import, its meaning, continues to grow and mutate in the field of time.  It is not as if it's old meanings pertinent to a 14th Century Christian, or to any Christian, have been made moot, but they have through time, and through each reader's consciousness, mutated.  And it is this ability to mutate, to expand and adapt itself to each new generation of readers, and to the specific life circumstances of each individual reader, that has given, and will continue to give, this poem its power.  How does one even begin to think about a body that has through a lifetime processed millions of sense impressions, perhaps even hundreds of millions of thoughts about those impressions, let alone conceive of what a collective humanity has experienced in a domain consisting of millions of people over millennia of time, or the even vaster ecological and evolutionary processes of life and the universe?  Dante's answer is not surprising.  But it is hidden from us, until we begin to conceive of that enormity in the way his poetry presents itself, which is, just as astrophysicists do today in seeking for the constants which allow our type of universe to exist, a type of universe which can create observers, who may ask and even attempt to answer how such a universe came into existence, observers who can seek to discover the parameters by which their universe continues to function beneath the allegory of language.   Linguistic allegories are visions which begin to enable us to think about these enormities, much as a small child begins to discover how his body interacts with the world through what primary educators call "manipulables".   Words are things that the mind may grasp, examine, turn over, and think with and about, feel with and about.  This is what everyone is doing whether they acknowledge the activity or not, through those Freudian processes of condensation, displacement and jokes or puns.  In order to find our own harmony, our own Edenic condition, we are all allegorizing all that is into something the mind can grasp.  We are creating mental and emotional manipulables that will help us return to our original home in our own personal heaven.   And if there has never been some golden collective age, almost any of us has experienced some moment in which our world comes right, in which health and joy ushers us out of the endless dichotomies of Time, its just or unjust actions, into what we might call the perfectly regulated system.  This perfect balance is something inconceivable to us in any situation wherein we are out of balance, just as history — personal, collective, or cosmological — makes this balance seem inconceivable except as a litany of what has gone wrong — Dante's Inferno — or how we put things right again — Dante's seven story mountain of Purgatory.  These two virtual  places are involved with history, involved with a temporal past composed of pain's imbalances, where that which is and was, juts out painfully like the bones of a broken limb, and tells each historical actor that the harmony and joy which they at some moments at least experienced, even if only in childhood or in sleep or in the womb, have been violently interrupted.  Dante called this interruption "sin", the original meaning of which is a vale, a valley, a place of confusion.  This is a state that we all know quite well, a state that brings the struggle for survival, or a Schopenhauerian despair or boredom.  It is a state of inner war and outer violence.  It is a state of crime and punishment, a state, as Dante as shown all too persuasively in the Inferno, of interminable agony, wherein even suicide or death cannot grant the repose of oblivion.   In this state of consciousness, the past is a terrible deviation and the future, as it is here, is, at best, only a prophesy of retribution to correct that deviation.  All this is encapsulated here in Beatrice's prophesy, and her testing of Dante's ability to remember, i.e., resurrect his own deviations through the processes of fear and shame — that is, through the affects of primal guilt.  He has been baptized in Lethe.  He has forgotten that world of imbalance and of deviation, a step that is necessary, but insufficient.  The canto concludes with a second baptism, in the river Eunoe, in which he "remembers" original harmony and joy.  That tree of judgement and of the knowledge of good and evil is now a fruitful fountain of ever nourishing joy.  But of this joy, the poet does not speak.  Perhaps because it is not something that can be expressed in purgatorial language.  Its expression belongs in another realm.  Still, there is something about this which refers to our own experience of health, an experience which is generalized and diffused throughout our whole system, while sickness or injury is particularized as the pain or discomfort of a symptom.  Perhaps now, at this important juncture of the poem, we are being invited to infuse ourselves, not with this or that particular meaning of this or that particular canto, but to feel — really feel — how wonderful this total immersion in the poem has been.  This work, although in its particulars, deals with the pain of human existence as the symptom of the mortal human condition, wherein life is only a race towards death, is asking that we shift our attention to all the exhilarating harmonies we have experienced while reading it.  Over or under or enveloping all these particular tortures is art, light, geometry, and number.1  For make no mistake, Dante's underlying allegory is number, as abstract as starlight, and as remote from the ordinary (note that word) tormented and tormenting human existence as are the stars.  Dante ends this canto with what he calls the necessary "curbing" or curtailing constant of art, which is not a balance of the opposites of crime and retribution, it is law, the Latin, jus, that which puts things right. This law defines those parameters through which our universe came into existence and through which it continues on its paths of development and creativity.  Dante was such an audacious poet that he set out to discover or devise a poem which embodied those constants, in its sound patterns, in its numbers, in its visions, in its allegories, and it may be that he has come as close to doing this as any of our contemporary astrophysics or spiritual gurus, and the wonder of this audaciousness is that its only chance of succeeding is through the deepest kind of humility, the humility of the lover in the presence of his or her beloved.

1.  Number for Dante may refer to something more than quantity or proportionality, there is also the question of number as allegory, that is to say, number as it is used in the Kabbalistic and numerological esoteria of Gematria.  Specifically here we have the famous mystery of the prophecy of 515 or DXV, i.e., nel quale un cinquecento diece e cinque (line 43).  Like the Feltro prophesy in Canto I of Inferno,  this and other, most commentators over the centuries link to a possible political leader who might come and bring peace and order to the chaos and violence of the Italian City States.  I would like to note that Aleister Crowley in 777 and Other Qabalistic Writings reads the Gematria of the number 515 as equated with three Latin phrases: Possessio sine angustiis, that is "Possession without restrictions;" Minister iudicii, "Minister of justice," and Phylacterium, "talisman" or "amulet."  I have no idea where Crowley came up with his knowledge, but the fit here is intriguing and I have already noted elsewhere the evidence we have for Dante's knowledge of the Kabbala.  The most interesting, and most convincing solution to the mystery that I have seen so far is that of Massimo Verdicchio, who, in his book, The Poetics of Dante's Paradiso, claims that both the 515 and the Feltro allegories refer to the poem itself, which would mean that for Dante no political or ecclesiastical solution is possible for the violent injustices of the world, but only an aesthetic/spiritual one, the one we find in poetry.  This solution also jives with that proposed by Walter Arensberg in his book The Cryptological Dante, in which he claims that there is in the DXV an anagram in Latin script for DUX, or Duc, that is, leader.  Arensbery finds in these lines a cryptological reference to Dante himself, as poet.  Using Kabbalistic numerical equivalencies of Gematria, Arensbery shows how the verses spell out Dante's name.  The interesting thing about all of these highly esoteric solutions, which I doubt many commentators would accept, is that they provide evidence from completely different sources, which are consistent with the text, and thus they provide a solution which has eluded scholars who have been seeking in vain for eight centuries for an historical figure that fits the poem's given criteria for the sought-for leader.   

1  "Deus venerunt gentes," alternating
2  Now three, now four, melodious psalmody
3  The maidens in the midst of tears began;

1  Deus, venerunt gentes,“ alternando
2  or tre or quattro dolce salmodia,
3  le donne incominciaro, e lagrimando;

4  And Beatrice, compassionate and sighing,
5  Listened to them with such a countenance,
6  That scarce more changed was Mary at the cross.

4  e Bëatrice, sospirosa e pia,
5  quelle ascoltava sì fatta, che poco
6  più a la croce si cambiò Maria.

7  But when the other virgins place had given
8  For her to speak, uprisen to her feet
9  With colour as of fire, she made response:

7  Ma poi che l'altre vergini dier loco
8  a lei di dir, levata dritta in pè,
9  rispuose, colorata come foco:

10  "'Modicum, et non videbitis me;
11  Et iterum,' my sisters predilect,
12  'Modicum, et vos videbitis me.'"

10  ”Modicum, et non videbitis me;
11  et iterum, sorelle mie dilette,
12  modicum, et vos videbitis me.“

13  Then all the seven in front of her she placed;
14  And after her, by beckoning only, moved
15  Me and the lady and the sage who stayed.

13  Poi le si mise innanzi tutte e sette,
14  e dopo sé, solo accennando, mosse
15  me e la donna e 'l savio che ristette.

16  So she moved onward; and I do not think
17  That her tenth step was placed upon the ground,
18  When with her eyes upon mine eyes she smote,

16  Così sen giva; e non credo che fosse
17  lo decimo suo passo in terra posto,
18  quando con li occhi li occhi mi percosse;

19  And with a tranquil aspect, "Come more quickly,"
20  To me she said, "that, if I speak with thee,
21  To listen to me thou mayst be well placed."

19  e con tranquillo aspetto ”Vien più tosto,“
20  mi disse, ”tanto che, s'io parlo teco,
21  ad ascoltarmi tu sie ben disposto.“

22  As soon as I was with her as I should be,
23  She said to me: "Why, brother, dost thou not
24  Venture to question now, in coming with me?"

22  Sì com' io fui, com' io dovëa, seco,
23  dissemi: ”Frate, perché non t'attenti
24  a domandarmi omai venendo meco?“

25  As unto those who are too reverential,
26  Speaking in presence of superiors,
27  Who drag no living utterance to their teeth,

25  Come a color che troppo reverenti
26  dinanzi a suo maggior parlando sono,
27  che non traggon la voce viva ai denti,

28  It me befell, that without perfect sound
29  Began I: "My necessity, Madonna,
30  You know, and that which thereunto is good."

28  avvenne a me, che sanza intero suono
29  incominciai: ”Madonna, mia bisogna
30  voi conoscete, e ciò ch'ad essa è buono.“

31  And she to me: "Of fear and bashfulness
32  Henceforward I will have thee strip thyself,
33  So that thou speak no more as one who dreams.

31  Ed ella a me: ”Da tema e da vergogna
32  voglio che tu omai ti disviluppe,
33  sì che non parli più com' om che sogna.

34  Know that the vessel which the serpent broke
35  Was, and is not; but let him who is guilty
36  Think that God's vengeance does not fear a sop.

34  Sappi che 'l vaso che 'l serpente ruppe,
35  fu e non è; ma chi n'ha colpa, creda
36  che vendetta di Dio non teme suppe.

37  Without an heir shall not for ever be
38  The Eagle that left his plumes upon the car,
39  Whence it became a monster, then a prey;

37  Non sarà tutto tempo sanza reda
38  l'aguglia che lasciò le penne al carro,
39  per che divenne mostro e poscia preda;

40  For verily I see, and hence narrate it,
41  The stars already near to bring the time,
42  From every hindrance safe, and every bar,

40  ch'io veggio certamente, e però il narro,
41  a darne tempo già stelle propinque,
42  secure d'ogn' intoppo e d'ogne sbarro,

43  Within which a Five-hundred, Ten, and Five,
44  One sent from God, shall slay the thievish woman
45  And that same giant who is sinning with her.

43  nel quale un cinquecento diece e cinque,
44  messo di Dio, anciderà la fuia
45  con quel gigante che con lei delinque.

46  And peradventure my dark utterance,
47  Like Themis and the Sphinx, may less persuade thee,
48  Since, in their mode, it clouds the intellect;

46  E forse che la mia narrazion buia,
47  qual Temi e Sfinge, men ti persuade,
48  perch' a lor modo lo 'ntelletto attuia;

49  But soon the facts shall be the Naiades
50  Who shall this difficult enigma solve,
51  Without destruction of the flocks and harvests.

49  ma tosto fier li fatti le Naiade,
50  che solveranno questo enigma forte
51  sanza danno di pecore o di biade.

52  Note thou; and even as by me are uttered
53 These words, so teach them unto those who live
54  That life which is a running unto death;

52  Tu nota; e sì come da me son porte,
53  così queste parole segna a' vivi
54  del viver ch'è un correre a la morte.

55  And bear in mind, whene'er thou writest them,
56  Not to conceal what thou hast seen the plant,
57  That twice already has been pillaged here.

55  E aggi a mente, quando tu le scrivi,
56  di non celar qual hai vista la pianta
57  ch'è or due volte dirubata quivi.

58  Whoever pillages or shatters it,
59  With blasphemy of deed offendeth God,
60  Who made it holy for his use alone.

58  Qualunque ruba quella o quella schianta,
59  con bestemmia di fatto offende a Dio,
60  che solo a l'uso suo la creò santa.

61  For biting that, in pain and in desire
62  Five thousand years and more the first-born soul
63  Craved Him, who punished in himself the bite.

61  Per morder quella, in pena e in disio
62  cinquemilia anni e più l'anima prima
63  bramò colui che 'l morso in sé punio.

64  Thy genius slumbers, if it deem it not
65  For special reason so pre-eminent
66  In height, and so inverted in its summit.

64  Dorme lo 'ngegno tuo, se non estima
65  per singular cagione essere eccelsa
66  lei tanto e sì travolta ne la cima.

67  And if thy vain imaginings had not been
68  Water of Elsa round about thy mind,
69  And Pyramus to the mulberry, their pleasure,

67  E se stati non fossero acqua d'Elsa
68  li pensier vani intorno a la tua mente,
69  e 'l piacer loro un Piramo a la gelsa,

70  Thou by so many circumstances only
71  The justice of the interdict of God
72  Morally in the tree wouldst recognize.

70  per tante circostanze solamente
71  la giustizia di Dio, ne l'interdetto,
72  conosceresti a l'arbor moralmente.

73  But since I see thee in thine intellect
74  Converted into stone and stained with sin,
75  So that the light of my discourse doth daze thee,

73  Ma perch' io veggio te ne lo 'ntelletto
74  fatto di pietra e, impetrato, tinto,
75  sì che t'abbaglia il lume del mio detto, 

76  I will too, if not written, at least painted,
77  Thou bear it back within thee, for the reason
78  That cinct with palm the pilgrim's staff is borne."

76  voglio anco, e se non scritto, almen dipinto,
77 che 'l te ne porti dentro a te per quello
78 che si reca il bordon di palma cinto.“

79  And I: "As by a signet is the wax
80  Which does not change the figure stamped upon it,
81  My brain is now imprinted by yourself.

79  E io: ”Sì come cera da suggello,
80  che la figura impressa non trasmuta,
81  segnato è or da voi lo mio cervello.

82  But wherefore so beyond my power of sight
83  Soars your desirable discourse, that aye
84  The more I strive, so much the more I lose it?"

82  Ma perché tanto sovra mia veduta
83  vostra parola disïata vola,
84  che più la perde quanto più s'aiuta?“

85  "That thou mayst recognize," she said, "the school
86  Which thou hast followed, and mayst see how far
87  Its doctrine follows after my discourse,

85  ”Perché conoschi,“ disse, ”quella scuola
86  c'hai seguitata, e veggi sua dottrina
87  come può seguitar la mia parola;

88  And mayst behold your path from the divine
89  Distant as far as separated is
90  From earth the heaven that highest hastens on."

88  e veggi vostra via da la divina
89  distar cotanto, quanto si discorda
90  da terra il ciel che più alto festina.“

91  Whence her I answered: "I do not remember
92  That ever I estranged myself from you,
93  Nor have I conscience of it that reproves me."

91  Ond' io rispuosi lei: ”Non mi ricorda
92  ch'i' stranïasse me già mai da voi,
93  né honne coscïenza che rimorda.“

94  "And if thou art not able to remember,"
95  Smiling she answered, "recollect thee now
96  That thou this very day hast drunk of Lethe;

94  ”E se tu ricordar non te ne puoi,“
95  sorridendo rispuose, ”or ti rammenta
96  come bevesti di Letè ancoi;

97  And if from smoke a fire may be inferred,
98  Such an oblivion clearly demonstrates
99  Some error in thy will elsewhere intent.

97  e se dal fummo foco s'argomenta,
98  cotesta oblivïon chiaro conchiude
99 colpa ne la tua voglia altrove attenta.

100  Truly from this time forward shall my words
101  Be naked, so far as it is befitting
102  To lay them open unto thy rude gaze."

100  Veramente oramai saranno nude
101  le mie parole, quanto converrassi
102 quelle scovrire a la tua vista rude.“

103  And more coruscant and with slower steps
104  The sun was holding the meridian circle,
105  Which, with the point of view, shifts here and there

103  E più corusco e con più lenti passi
104  teneva il sole il cerchio di merigge,
105 che qua e là, come li aspetti, fassi,

106  When halted (as he cometh to a halt,
107  Who goes before a squadron as its escort,
108  If something new he find upon his way)

106  quando s'affisser, sì come s'affigge
107  chi va dinanzi a gente per iscorta
108  se trova novitate o sue vestigge,

109  The ladies seven at a dark shadow's edge,
110  Such as, beneath green leaves and branches black,
111  The Alp upon its frigid border wears.

109  le sette donne al fin d'un'ombra smorta,
110  qual sotto foglie verdi e rami nigri
111  sovra suoi freddi rivi l'alpe porta.

112  In front of them the Tigris and Euphrates
113  Methought I saw forth issue from one fountain,
114  And slowly part, like friends, from one another.

112  Dinanzi ad esse ”Ëufratès e Tigri
113  veder mi parve uscir d'una fontana,
114  e, quasi amici, dipartirsi pigri.

115  "O light, O glory of the human race!
116  What stream is this which here unfolds itself
117  From out one source, and from itself withdraws?"

115  “O luce, o gloria de la gente umana,
116  che acqua è questa che qui si dispiega
117  da un principio e sé da sé lontana?”
118  For such a prayer, 'twas said unto me, "Pray
119  Matilda that she tell thee;" and here answered,
120  As one does who doth free himself from blame,

118  Per cotal priego detto mi fu: “Priega
119  Matelda che 'l ti dica.” E qui rispuose,
120  come fa chi da colpa si dislega,

121  The beautiful lady: "This and other things
122  Were told to him by me; and sure I am
123  The water of Lethe has not hid them from him."

121  la bella donna: “Questo e altre cose
122  dette li son per me; e son sicura
123  che l'acqua di Letè non gliel nascose.”

124  And Beatrice: "Perhaps a greater care,
125  Which oftentimes our memory takes away,
126  Has made the vision of his mind obscure.

124  E Bëatrice: “Forse maggior cura,
125  che spesse volte la memoria priva,
126  fatt' ha la mente sua ne li occhi oscura.

127  But Eunoe behold, that yonder rises;
128  Lead him to it, and, as thou art accustomed,
129  Revive again the half-dead virtue in him."

127  Ma vedi Eünoè che là diriva:
128  menalo ad esso, e come tu se' usa,
129  la tramortita sua virtù ravviva.”

130  Like gentle soul, that maketh no excuse,
131  But makes its own will of another's will
132  As soon as by a sign it is disclosed,

130  Come anima gentil, che non fa scusa,
131  ma fa sua voglia de la voglia altrui
132  tosto che è per segno fuor dischiusa;

133  Even so, when she had taken hold of me,
134  The beautiful lady moved, and unto Statius
135  Said, in her womanly manner, "Come with him."

133  così, poi che da essa preso fui,
134  la bella donna mossesi, e a Stazio
135  donnescamente disse: “Vien con lui.”

136  If, Reader, I possessed a longer space
137  For writing it, I yet would sing in part
138  Of the sweet draught that ne'er would satiate me;

136  S'io avessi, lettor, più lungo spazio
137  da scrivere, i' pur cantere' in parte
138  lo dolce ber che mai non m'avria sazio;

139  But inasmuch as full are all the leaves
140 Made ready for this second canticle,
141  The curb of art no farther lets me go.

139  ma perché piene son tutte le carte
140 ordite a questa cantica seconda,
141  non mi lascia più ir lo fren de l'arte.

142  From the most holy water I returned
143  Regenerate, in the manner of new trees
144  That are renewed with a new foliage,

142  Io ritornai da la santissima onda
143  rifatto sì come piante novelle
144  rinovellate di novella fronda,

145  Pure and disposed to mount unto the stars.

145  puro e disposto a salire a le stelle.

Paradiso

Canto I
When we come into the Paradiso, we have arrived at the central problem of narrative, and indeed, that of listening to language or of reading its written representations on a page, a stone wall, a piece of bark, or a computer screen.  If not to be on Earth, as Beatrice emphatically tells Dante (line 91) that he is not, is to be in eternity, should we assume that this ascendance means we have escaped the narrative stream of language as it sequentially unfolds?  If so, have we then arrived in a world whose unity allows change, but not that change associated with beginnings, middles, or ends — inception, growth, or decay.   In this world, how is language, even poetic language as great and as subtle as is Dante's, ever going create a representation of that unified, ever-new state?  Inferno told us the consequences of self-centered action taken solely to slake the crudest of animal passions, wherein the human mind, becomes sub-bestial.  The actors in Hell are not only wholly perverted to pursue their bodily appetites, which have their limits in the natural world, and do not pollute the creatures whose bodies have evolved to purely express them, they are also wholly addicted to abstractions — abstractions such as political factions, prestige, family pride, reputation, things that by their very nature are no-things, and are thus unbounded in their rapacious capacities to damage and destroy.  Rising above that catastrophe,  Purgatorio shows us the evolution of a human mind ruled by the heart of compassion.  The abstractions become curbs on the appetites, not prods to indulge them, and we meet with remorse, guilt, justice, concern for others, humility, acceptance, devotion.  In Purgatory, the human mind that had accrued all the torments of Hell, in an endless war of not merely survival, but, as certain deranged politicians in our times evilly image it: Full spectrum dominance — the attempt to subdue inner fears with outward control, and the complete subjugation of the Other.  All this, in Purgatory has been renounced, and suffering, although still present, is only the stubbornness of that old demonic mind's resistance to losing that identity which had calcified around the old terror-based ambitions.  Now we come to Paradise, and if that human, sub-bestial mind has been purged, its identity washed away in the oblivion of Lethe, while the compassionate mind's virtues have been infused by its baptism in the river Eunoe, to what is this post-lapsarian mind devoted?  Does it remain in a void of Buddhistic No-Mind, or is this new vessel ready to receive a different kind of identity, one that we had been destined to have and be all along?  And how can poetry, with only an Earth space and time-bound language at its disposal, express this new heart/mind's identity?   The kind of reading, the kind of narration, that we have been used to in the first two canticles of the Commedia, and in virtually every other kind of reading in our lives, is now going to be inadequate, or maybe, more to the point, made irrelevant, to this place of bliss without surcease, of multiplicity without conflict, of eternity without the effects of mutantizing and death-dealing Time.  In Hell, evil is finally frozen, as unfree as a machine, Satan's mechanized body generating the foul wind wherein temporal change is always a buffeting and fetid degradation, and fate is the automaticity of mortal life, racing always, in Beatrice's words, towards Death —  not a releasing Death, but rather a cessation of free will, and a moral paralysis which locks one into the most abominable and interminable experience of pain.  Is the opposite of this paralysis to be only a second kind unfreedom, an eternal sameness of bliss, wherein only the One exists, which — or rather who — subsumes all others in his radiant stasis?  We know who we are in Satan.  We know who we are in the act of purgation.  But who are we, unique and free, in the orbit of One who neither changes nor revolves?  Dante's audacious enterprise in the Paradiso is to answer this question and resolve this mighty paradox.  In Canto One of the Inferno, Dante talks of the ineffable as a matter of choice, that the tale he is about to remember is so abominable, so terrifying to recall, that nothing less than the desire to do good for others could compel him to write about it.  Here, in Paradise, ordinary memory, which is always a second-hand dredging-up of the past, and thus a temporally bound thing, has little or no role.  Eternity has no past, and no future either, it is perpetual presence.  The ineffability of the experience is not a matter of conscious choice.  Nothing short of divine inspiration can in any way produce a language that can relate the ever-presentness of Paradise, because all earthly languages are rooted in memory, rooted in their meaning-sense in the past.  What is, in fact, present in language, is not it's meaning, but its sound.  And sound is the thing that leaps to the fore here, with Dante's long and stunningly pagan invocation, not to Jesus, nor to the Christian God, but to Apollo — and in lieu of the fruit from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, the tree invoked by the aspirant gives the laurel crown of poetry.  One has to ask why this is so, and why moreover does he conjure up the horrible image of the Apollo-defeated poet as being skinned, as was Marsyas, when he attempted to transcend human skill, and pretend to be filled with the divine.  What Dante seems to be alluding to here is a fundamental difference between Judeo-Christian scripture and pagan mythology.  The first being an historicization of the divine, a bringing of the treasure of eternity into the temporal realm of cultural memory transmission, a process that must lead to the mystery of Jesus, the divine/human/father/son, and the second being derived from a kind of species-childhood, an imaginative effort to make sense of the mysteries of experience through the culturally shared fantasy of myth.  In the first case God is reality, and in the second a god is the product of human psychology.  Perhaps the mythological invocation alludes to that old taboo, which warns that to speak the true name of God is to be immolated, and since Dante — the diachronic Dante, who exists both inside his text as aspirant and outside his text as poet — can only be immolated as aspirant, but never as poet.  As poet, he must elevate the meaning-text of his language through psychological mythologization, while the sound text blazes forth the actual experience of Paradise.  Other solutions also presents themselves, not necessarily as alternatives, but perhaps as both/ands, thereby deepening the text as a mimetic representation of the cosmos, not merely a symbolic one, in so far as at the level of signification it may seem one-dimensional or dialectical, but at the various levels of metaphor and allegory it is shown to be, like creation, inclusive of multidimensional processes, processes which regulate one another to achieve both novelty and homeostasis.  Consider the example of Marsyas, a figure traditionally associated with overweening pride and the human usurpation of divine power — and it is that.  But Dante asks to assume that very role, with perhaps the caveat that, unlike Marsyas, he wants to humbly negate his own arrogance and align himself with those creative powers responsible for Creation.  After all, throughout the poem, Dante selects references from a wide variety of texts to elevate his own, so that he may be said to acknowledge that his creative power is not merely his own, but only a part of a living network of creators, which collectively are channeling and guiding the universe's own powers of creation.  Similarly, there may be both affirmation and negation in the way the text deals with Apollo.  It may be that the well-worn interpretation of the god as a failed suitor to Daphne, wherein she is turned into a Laurel tree, is really a consummation, since trees feed on sunlight, as Dante feeds on the light of Beatrice, and we will find as we proceed in the Paradiso, an increasing array of light metaphors.   It would not be unlike Dante to present in his mythological readings surprisingly ironic interpretations, especially ones that negate that old saw that there are some things which are impossible for language to express.  That may be, and the text asserts such more than once, but Dante attempts to humbly elevate poetry to a degree that as much or more than any other human endeavor, it puts us in touch with the divine.  It is a very tricky business he is embarked upon here, and we, as readers and listeners, must realize where we are.  We must not contextualize everything from where we have been.  The animal mind that we found manifested in the depraved shades of Hell will be bored by this kind of poetry, and the emotional mind, like those minds in Purgatory, will be confused by it.  But here, there is something new — ever-new.  Perhaps — barrowing a term from a different tradition — we might call this ever-new mind the Satori mind.  After illumination, what then?  The awakened one is still a stranger in a strange heaven, and his development, to find more of God's light from his condition of embodying less of it, must change via a kind of philosophical/theological series of openings, via the logic of the logos, whereby the already absolved and cleansed spirit can become the vessel (as the text claims in line 14) of more of that light — and let us not forget, also more of its movement (line 1), that is to say, of its freedom.  One could contemplate this movement as the relatively greater activity in an organic being, in terms of the organization of atoms, molecules, cells, and in terms of sensory, ideational, and affective capacities (line 120), than in an inorganic substance.  And yet an organism for all of its trillions of independent cells, operates as a unity.  How does this happen?  Dante suggests that this phenomenon is the result of some kind of harmonizing virtue (virtue in the sense of creative power), which has evolved itself to express its own organization, in short, a universe which has evolved observers, observers which may examine the mysteries of that universe where observers such as themselves are possible.  For Dante, this potential of the universe to create and organize matter to the extent that such things as a Dante, his Commedia, and especially his love for Beatrice, is divine, is God.  I think this is still the most serious cosmological and personal issue that human beings can undertake to contemplate or to in any way comprehend, and the contemplation of this confrontation is the subject of the Paradiso, no different for Dante than it was for Einstein, or for us.  This poem attempts to refine the mind of its author, and by extension, its readers, to more and more subtly contemplate this most personal and cosmological of mysteries.  What we should be experiencing as we read and contemplate the Paradiso is the subtle expansion of our own capabilities to manifest that Mind whose potential continues to evolve, with no diminution of its own potential.  Is such a thing even possible?  Well, it is as possible as the force of gravity, which no matter how much influence it exerts upon mass never suffers any diminution of its potential force.  To my way of thinking, the Paradiso opens our minds to that potential, and the two subjects that spring to the fore, besides Dante's own theological thinking, are ecology and astrophysics, wherein a systems-thinking approach to life in the cosmos is the only way to proceed, and objects are seen as temporary expressions of relationships in constant flow.  There is certainly an approach here, which all scientists and theologians unconsciously accept, but few artists or poets do, namely, that our greatness comes from the greatness of our calling, our advocation, not the other way around.  The invocation to this first canto of the Paradiso is quite direct in making this claim.  Dante's greatness as a poet comes from his faith in poetry to express the most profound aspects of existence.  To Dante (and to me as well), poetry is as good a vehicle for these inquiries as is science or theology, and perhaps, in terms of its accessibility to the non-expert, and its potential for relating the biggest issues at cosmological scales to the most intimate and personal ones, the best way for most of us to relate our individual existences to the existence of the ALL.  Plus, poetry has one added dimension that is not an attribute of ecology or astrophysics.  It is the expression of love.

One could argue that in the Paradiso, poetry has become a sort of Augustinian branch of theology for the minions, a sort of sugar-coated homily to help the unschooled mind swallow the subtilties of scholasticism — that the purpose of poetry and of the figurative and poetic aspects of scripture is to prepare the mind to receive the more elevated theology of revelation.  I think Dante would assert that this is bass ackwards.  We read Augustine to better understand Dante, we don't read Dante to better understand Augustine.  Poetry is not an allegorical shadow pointing to revelation, it is revelation.  Why? because it alone elevates language and makes it an analog expression of the most subtle curves and ellipticals of experience.  It does not bully language into a theological argument or a scientific abstract.  It allows language the freedom to flow, which is what all aspects of the universe and of consciousness are constantly doing.  For poetry, contradictions and paradoxes, yeses and no's, assertions and denials, are no barriers to expression or experience, or as Whitman expresses it: "Do I contradict myself.  Very well then I contradict myself, I am large I contain multitudes."  Poetry is an open system which contains multitudes without constraining them.  It is form forming at the borders of formlessness and formlessness dissolving the too rigid boundaries of imprisoning forms.  Augustine held that everything worthwhile in language was to be found in the scriptures, and that the entire purpose of any kind of writing or exposition was to enable us to better understand scripture.  He would have found Dante's invocation to Apollo here to be at best, allegory, and at worst, heresy.  And herein lies the difference between Augustine and Dante, for Dante can use his linguistic figures in the same way as do scriptures, as allegory, yes, but also as an analog and guide to the soul both in the putrid swarthy regions of Hell, and in the light-saturated regions of Paradise.  Poetry embraces the worst and the best, the false and the true, and in the essence of its existence, it infuses an aesthetic beauty into all that it expresses, so that like penetrating light itself, it enlivens and illuminates all that it touches.   By comparison,  science and theology can only allude to such phenomena.  Poetry can be both about revelation, and be revelation.  In Paradise, language and light are the penetrating tropes used to reveal the universal mind.  Dante says here that what he is experiencing cannot be contained by memory, and yet something still blazes forth from these verses, and the great paradox is that the language of any poem cannot contain that total essence of poetry, but only expresses that essence in greater or lesser degrees.  Can we not hear that Dante is simultaneously showing poetry's  expressive power and its ineffibility in the same breath?   Can we not see how he is making of light and language a unity, which the author of The Cloud of Unknowing tells us both serves as a buffer that keeps us from being immolated and reduced to a mere vapor in the universal flux, and as a linking conduit, which umbelicals us to it?  This duel nature of the fundaments of diversity and multiplicity, of individual identity obliterated in God's singular bliss but without losing its own sense of self as it is conflated with the cosmic Self, has here an oscillating directionality: up/down, reflect/emit, greater/lesser, odd/even, opaque/transparent, dense/ephemeral, expressible/ineffable.  At the beginning of the canto in line 6 there is a descent and at the end in line 142 there is an ascent.  The heaviest elements of earth rise like fire, and miracles are made mundane.  The same time exists as day and night.  There is the odd and even, the curved and angular of 4 circles and 3 crosses (these being celestial calendrical markings of Time relating to the seasons of Earth).   There are two Parnassian mountains.  There are two suns.  There is a sun that emits rays.  There is a moon that reflects them.  Beatrice's eyes reflect but also pierce, like the eyes of an eagle, human, inhuman, transhuman, Christlike, but not Christ.  She scolds, but smiles.  There is light that illuminates, yet blinds.  There is fire that rises as naturally as water falls, or falls as lightning just as naturally, against its own inclination to rise, and there is the soul of poetry in the midst of all these paradoxes, shuffling about universals with peculiar metaphors embedded in particular sounds.  

1  The glory of Him who moveth everything
2  Doth penetrate the universe, and shine
3  In one part more and in another less.

1  La gloria di colui che tutto move
2  per l'universo penetra, e risplende
3  in una parte più e meno altrove. 

4  Within that heaven which most his light receives
5  Was I, and things beheld which to repeat
6  Nor knows, nor can, who from above descends;

4  Nel ciel che più de la sua luce prende
5  fu' io, e vidi cose che ridire
6  né sa né può chi di là sù discende; 

7  Because in drawing near to its desire
8  Our intellect ingulphs itself so far,
9  That after it the memory cannot go.

7  perché appressando sé al suo disire,
8  nostro intelletto si profonda tanto,
9  che dietro la memoria non può ire. 

10  Truly whatever of the holy realm
11  I had the power to treasure in my mind
12  Shall now become the subject of my song.

10  Veramente quant' io del regno santo
11  ne la mia mente potei far tesoro,
12 13 sarà ora materia del mio canto.

13  O good Apollo, for this last emprise
14  Make of me such a vessel of thy power
15  As giving the beloved laurel asks!

13  O buono Appollo, a l'ultimo lavoro
14  fammi del tuo valor sì fatto vaso,
15  come dimandi a dar l'amato alloro.

16  One summit of Parnassus hitherto
17  Has been enough for me, but now with both
18  I needs must enter the arena left.

16  Infino a qui l'un giogo di Parnaso
17  assai mi fu; ma or con amendue
18  m'è uopo intrar ne l'aringo rimaso.

19  Enter into my bosom, thou, and breathe
20  As at the time when Marsyas thou didst draw
21  Out of the scabbard of those limbs of his.

19  Entra nel petto mio, e spira tue
20  sì come quando Marsïa traesti
21  de la vagina de le membra sue.

22  O power divine, lend'st thou thyself to me
23  So that the shadow of the blessed realm
24  Stamped in my brain I can make manifest,

22  O divina virtù, se mi ti presti
23  tanto che l'ombra del beato regno
24  segnata nel mio capo io manifesti,

25  Thou'lt see me come unto thy darling tree,
26  And crown myself thereafter with those leaves
27  Of which the theme and thou shall make me worthy.

25  vedra'mi al piè del tuo diletto legno
26  venire, e coronarmi de le foglie
27  che la materia e tu mi farai degno.

28  So seldom, Father, do we gather them
29  For triumph or of Caesar or of Poet,
30  (The fault and shame of human inclinations,)

28  Sì rade volte, padre, se ne coglie
29  per trïunfare o cesare o poeta,
30  colpa e vergogna de l'umane voglie,

31  That the Peneian foliage should bring forth
32  Joy to the joyous Delphic deity,
33  When any one it makes to thirst for it.

31  che parturir letizia in su la lieta
32  delfica deïtà dovria la fronda
33  peneia, quando alcun di sé asseta.

34  A little spark is followed by great flame;
35  Perchance with better voices after me
36  Shall prayer be made that Cyrrha may respond!

34  Poca favilla gran fiamma seconda:
35 forse di retro a me con miglior voci
36  si pregherà perché Cirra risponda.

37  To mortal men by passages diverse
38  Uprises the world's lamp; but by that one
39  Which circles four uniteth with three crosses,

37  Surge ai mortali per diverse foci
38  la lucerna del mondo; ma da quella
39  che quattro cerchi giugne con tre croci,

40  With better course and with a better star
41  Conjoined it issues, and the mundane wax
42  Tempers and stamps more after its own fashion.

40  con miglior corso e con migliore stella
41  esce congiunta, e la mondana cera
42  più a suo modo tempera e suggella.

43  Almost that passage had made morning there
44  And evening here, and there was wholly white
45  That hemisphere, and black the other part,

43  Fatto avea di là mane e di qua sera
44  tal foce, e quasi tutto era là bianco
45  quello emisperio, e l'altra parte nera,

46  When Beatrice towards the left-hand side
47  I saw turned round, and gazing at the sun;
48  Never did eagle fasten so upon it!

46  quando Beatrice in sul sinistro fianco
47  vidi rivolta e riguardar nel sole:
48  aguglia sì non li s'affisse unquanco.

49  And even as a second ray is wont
50  To issue from the first and reascend,
51  Like to a pilgrim who would fain return,

49  E sì come secondo raggio suole
50  uscir del primo e risalire in suso,
51  pur come pelegrin che tornar vuole,

52  Thus of her action, through the eyes infused
53  In my imagination, mine I made,
54  And sunward fixed mine eyes beyond our wont.

52  così de l'atto suo, per li occhi infuso
53  ne l'imagine mia, il mio si fece,
54  e fissi li occhi al sole oltre nostr' uso.

55  There much is lawful which is here unlawful
56  Unto our powers, by virtue of the place
57  Made for the human species as its own.

55  Molto è licito là, che qui non lece
56  a le nostre virtù, mercé del loco
57  fatto per proprio de l'umana spece.

58  Not long I bore it, nor so little while
59  But I beheld it sparkle round about
60  Like iron that comes molten from the fire;

58  Io nol soffersi molto, né sì poco,
59  ch'io nol vedessi sfavillar dintorno,
60  com' ferro che bogliente esce del foco;

61  And suddenly it seemed that day to day
62  Was added, as if He who has the power
63  Had with another sun the heaven adorned.

61  e di sùbito parve giorno a giorno
62  essere aggiunto, come quei che puote
63  avesse il ciel d'un altro sole addorno.

64  With eyes upon the everlasting wheels
65  Stood Beatrice all intent, and I, on her
66  Fixing my vision from above removed,

64  Beatrice tutta ne l'etterne rote
65  fissa con li occhi stava; e io in lei
66  le luci fissi, di là sù rimote.

67  Such at her aspect inwardly became
68  As Glaucus, tasting of the herb that made him
69  Peer of the other gods beneath the sea.

67  Nel suo aspetto tal dentro mi fei,
68  qual si fé Glauco nel gustar de l'erba
69  che 'l fé consorto in mar de li altri dèi.

70  To represent transhumanise in words
71  Impossible were; the example, then, suffice
72  Him for whom Grace the experience reserves.

70  Trasumanar significar per verba
71  non si poria; però l'essemplo basti
72  a cui esperïenza grazia serba.

73  If I was merely what of me thou newly
74  Createdst, Love who governest the heaven,
75  Thou knowest, who didst lift me with thy light!

73  S'i' era sol di me quel che creasti
74  novellamente, amor che 'l ciel governi,
75  tu 'l sai, che col tuo lume mi levasti.

76  When now the wheel, which thou dost make eternal
77  Desiring thee, made me attentive to it
78  By harmony thou dost modulate and measure,

76  Quando la rota che tu sempiterni
77  desiderato, a sé mi fece atteso
78  con l'armonia che temperi e discerni,

79  Then seemed to me so much of heaven enkindled
80  By the sun's flame, that neither rain nor river
81  E'er made a lake so widely spread abroad.

79  parvemi tanto allor del cielo acceso
80  de la fiamma del sol, che pioggia o fiume
81  lago non fece alcun tanto disteso.

82 The newness of the sound and the great light
83  Kindled in me a longing for their cause,
84  Never before with such acuteness felt;

82  La novità del suono e 'l grande lume
83  di lor cagion m'accesero un disio
84  mai non sentito di cotanto acume.

85  Whence she, who saw me as I saw myself,
86  To quiet in me my perturbed mind,
87  Opened her mouth, ere I did mine to ask,

85  Ond' ella, che vedea me sì com' io,
86  a quïetarmi l'animo commosso,
87  pria ch'io a dimandar, la bocca aprio

88  And she began: "Thou makest thyself so dull
89  With false imagining, that thou seest not
90  What thou wouldst see if thou hadst shaken it off.

88  e cominciò: “Tu stesso ti fai grosso
89  col falso imaginar, sì che non vedi
90  ciò che vedresti se l'avessi scosso.

91  Thou art not upon earth, as thou believest;
92  But lightning, fleeing its appropriate site,
93  Ne'er ran as thou, who thitherward returnest."

91  Tu non se' in terra, sì come tu credi;
92  ma folgore, fuggendo il proprio sito,
93  non corse come tu ch'ad esso riedi.”

94  If of my former doubt I was divested
95  By these brief little words more smiled than spoken,
96  I in a new one was the more ensnared;

94  S'io fui del primo dubbio disvestito
95  per le sorrise parolette brevi,
96  dentro ad un nuovo più fu' inretito

97  And said: "Already did I rest content
98  From great amazement; but am now amazed
99  In what way I transcend these bodies light."

97  e dissi: “Già contento requïevi
98  di grande ammirazion; ma ora ammiro
99  com' io trascenda questi corpi levi.”

100  Whereupon she, after a pitying sigh,
101  Her eyes directed tow'rds me with that look
102  A mother casts on a delirious child;

100  Ond' ella, appresso d'un pïo sospiro,
101  li occhi drizzò ver' me con quel sembiante
102  che madre fa sovra figlio deliro,

103  And she began: "All things whate'er they be
104  Have order among themselves, and this is form,
105  That makes the universe resemble God.

103  e cominciò: “Le cose tutte quante
104  hanno ordine tra loro, e questo è forma
105  che l'universo a Dio fa simigliante.

106  Here do the higher creatures see the footprints
107  Of the Eternal Power, which is the end
108  Whereto is made the law already mentioned.

106  Qui veggion l'alte creature l'orma
107  de l'etterno valore, il qual è fine
108  al quale è fatta la toccata norma.

109  In the order that I speak of are inclined
110  All natures, by their destinies diverse,
111  More or less near unto their origin;

109  Ne l'ordine ch'io dico sono accline
110  tutte nature, per diverse sorti,
111  più al principio loro e men vicine;

112  Hence they move onward unto ports diverse
113  O'er the great sea of being; and each one
114  With instinct given it which bears it on.

112  onde si muovono a diversi porti
113  per lo gran mar de l'essere, e ciascuna
114  con istinto a lei dato che la porti.

115  This bears away the fire towards the moon;
116  This is in mortal hearts the motive power
117  This binds together and unites the earth.

115  Questi ne porta il foco inver' la luna;
116  questi ne' cor mortali è permotore;
117  questi la terra in sé stringe e aduna;

118  Nor only the created things that are
119  Without intelligence this bow shoots forth,
120  But those that have both intellect and love.

118  né pur le creature che son fore
119  d'intelligenza quest' arco saetta,
120  ma quelle c'hanno intelletto e amore.

121  The Providence that regulates all this
122  Makes with its light the heaven forever quiet,
123  Wherein that turns which has the greatest haste.

121  La provedenza, che cotanto assetta,
122 del suo lume fa 'l ciel sempre quïeto
123 nel qual si volge quel c'ha maggior fretta;

124  And thither now, as to a site decreed,
125  Bears us away the virtue of that cord
126  Which aims its arrows at a joyous mark.

124  e ora lì, come a sito decreto,
125 c en porta la virtù di quella corda
126  che ciò che scocca drizza in segno lieto.

127  True is it, that as oftentimes the form
128  Accords not with the intention of the art,
129  Because in answering is matter deaf,

127  Vero è che, come forma non s'accorda
128  molte fïate a l'intenzion de l'arte,
129  perch' a risponder la materia è sorda,

130  So likewise from this course doth deviate
131  Sometimes the creature, who the power possesses,
132  Though thus impelled, to swerve some other way,

130  così da questo corso si diparte
131  talor la creatura, c'ha podere
132  di piegar, così pinta, in altra parte;

133  (In the same wise as one may see the fire
134  Fall from a cloud,) if the first impetus
135  Earthward is wrested by some false delight.

133  e sì come veder si può cadere
134  foco di nube, sì l'impeto primo
135  l'atterra torto da falso piacere.

136  Thou shouldst not wonder more, if well I judge,
137  At thine ascent, than at a rivulet
138  From some high mount descending to the lowland.

136  Non dei più ammirar, se bene stimo,
137  lo tuo salir, se non come d'un rivo
138  se d'alto monte scende giuso ad imo.

139  Marvel it would be in thee, if deprived
140  Of hindrance, thou wert seated down below,
141  As if on earth the living fire were quiet."

139  Maraviglia sarebbe in te se, privo
140  d'impedimento, giù ti fossi assiso,
141  com' a terra quïete in foco vivo.”

142  Thereat she heavenward turned again her face.

142  Quinci rivolse inver' lo cielo il viso.

Canto II
Let's call the poetworld, the universe-as Isness.  Isness is all-inclusive.  Like an ocean, it is the mother of all earthly things, like the sky, it's domain is limitless.  Its creatures are legion and protean.  The sound-image world of water-sky denotes one interchanging and interchangeable thing.  In these interchanges, the speakerlisteners, from one point of view, are constantly interchanging positions, there is movement, oscillation.  But from a sort of Barycenter between these positions, there is stillness.  This Barycenter has been depicted in various mythic traditions from times immemorial as a well, or a whirlpool in its concavity and as a central pillar in its convexity, uterus and umbilical.  Fosse and mountain.  Inside every present-tense movement of sound, this Barycenter is the eternal presence of silence.  How does Dante express this?  By gathering together various positions points in the movements of sound with abiding metaphors. These metaphor are elemental — in some traditions, fire, water, earth, air, and a sheath or membrane that contains them.  Think: the cell of an organic creature — the substance stuff inseparable from its functions — the metaphoric/meaning-making elements of a poem.  One of these metaphors is the sea, another is the sky, another a desert, another a wood, another a mountain, another a pit or cave.  Here the poem speaks of the sea, and the in-between state of two positions, large ship of poetry, a small bark of listeners/readers.  Canto One, Inferno: metaphor of a swimmer who nearly drowned, from shore, looks back on the sea which almost swallowed him.  Canto One, Purgatorio, saved sinners transported by the angel/craft to the isle mountain of purgation.  Here, a sea passage, a warning and an invitation.  Inside all of these dualities is that still pivot-point of transcendence, in which one thing becomes another, the drowning victim, the saved, the invocation to sky-father Apollo, at whose rapist/lover's touch, Daphne became the laurel.  The crown that completes the initiation of ephebe to poet.  This image from the previous canto interacts, with the breath of the weaver, Minerva, the star guidance of the Bears, Ursa Major, Ursa minor.  Remember there are seven starts in Ursa Major, seven planets in the Commedia's heaven, seven chakras climbing up the spine, seven colors in the spectrum of visible light.  Remember the festivals of Athens, the Bear Festivals, the virgin girls, called bears, their first menses, their secret rites, like the huntress goddesses, virgin, untamed, moon-mad, awakening from childhood's hibernation, pursued by gods, transformed to trees, to stars.  Bears.  Names mean something, epithets are condensed genealogies, allegories of experiences, stories told and retold, through the seasons, in firelight, at feasts, to chase away plague, hunger, and the night.  The bogey's, the Bears.   Dante will meet with St. Bernard of Clairvaux later, that name meaning "Bold Bear."  Could it be that this figure was chosen because of his name? because that name links it with the constellations which never dip below the horizon, and which contain the pole star?   Never dipping below the horizon means never returning to the chaos of the sea, and yet, as the dippers, these constellations could be thought of the sea's celestial source.  Begin to wonder: Why myth?  Why not scripture?  Myth is eternal, scripture historical, where they cross is the time of incarnation, mortal/immortal, the Barycenter of Time.  The exoteric and the esoteric.  Hair and horns.  The casual reader is exoteric, gets lost in the complexity of all the mytho-scriptural allusions.  The esoteric reader follows allusions to infinity.  These latter few batten on Angel's bread, ever nourished, never sated.  Each myth in its burgeoning families of associations leads to infinite reflection, infinite musings.  The muses are ever-present, ever-elaborating, ever-singing, ever-weaving.  Sailing is song, a sea passage across the infinite.  Breath fills the sails, conducts the ship of the poem.  At the poem's conclusion, the sails are furled, but the breath's breezes go on.  In the poetic Isness world — and in the world — one thing becomes another — one thing is another.  Apollo is Phoebus, Minerva is Pallas Minerva, Pallas Athena.  Remember the stories.  The human/divine contests: Apollo, Maryses, Minerva/Arachne.  Remember the difference between human skill and divine revelation, and the punishments for confusing one with the other.  Remember the spider woman myths of Native Americans.  She brought fire back to a world of darkness.  The small and the subtle triumphs over the large and the gross, the universe is spun of gossamer.  Remember how the works of creature and Creator are conflated, creation from Creation, the minute complexities of evolution unfolding from an originating singularity.  Remember the fate of the prideful adventurers, Ulysses and Jason.  Remember the brevity of the wake of a ship's prow ploughing ocean water or the sounds of words passing in a poem.  Remember Jason's plough in Colchos, sewing dragon's teeth for soldiers.  Remember the constellation Drago, the dragon myths, the serpent strands of DNA, the serpent myths, the Emerald Tablet's pronouncement, "As above, so below," the same laws governing atoms and galaxies.  Dante is in exile, a middle aged wanderer, homeless, a guest on Earth, writing the poem of his younger self, losing his mundane misery in myriad mirrors of mythic speculation, singing, weaving, challenging the gods, master made master at the feet of the bear girl, Beatrice.  Remember how the divine child, Cupid, masters mighty Apollo, how love is innocence, its wanton caprices conquering all the gods, cowing them with desire, conjuring them with jealousies, all saved and victimized by the con-created and perpetual thirst of the dei-formed realms, whose effects are so swift, that we perceive them before their causes, the arrow striking before its flight, its flight re-perceived before its release from the notch of the bow, Time in reverse, a symbol of simultaneity in the sequences of words, the light reflected from the belovèd's eyes.  Those twin stars freeze the velocities of our multiplicitous musings, she tells us:  "Fix gratefully your mind on God."  We are no longer exiled orphans on fallen Earth,  we are diffused, yet whole, in the luminous cloud of the moon.  We are ready.  We have and are the divine curiosity-child. whose innocence has sprung from the seasoned adult.  

In the previous canto, Beatrice has told Dante, you are no longer on Earth, and throughout the poem, in Hell, on Purgatory's mountain, Time has been curiously both a celestial and terrestrial wonder.  Here we are in heaven, but what is heaven? and what was Earth?  This passage from Hamlet's Mill (de Santillana & von Dechend) reveals:

Meanwhile  it is necessary to explain again what this "earth' is that modern interpreters like to take for a pancake.  The mythical earth is, in fact, a plane, but this earth is not our earth.  "Earth" is the implied plane through the four points of the year, marked by the equinoxes and solstices, in other words the ecliptic.  And this is why this earth is very frequently said to be quadrangular.  The four "corners," that is, the zodiacal constellations rising heliacally at both equinoxes and solstices, parts of the "frame" { }, are the points which determine an "earth."  Every world-age has its own "earth."  It is for this very reason that "ends of the world" are said to take place.  A new "earth" arises, when another set of zodiacal constellations brought in by precession determines the year points.

Remember from the previous canto, that elaborate definition of the time: the circle of the equator, the zodiac, and the equinoctial colure?  Why is Dante able to say that he is traversing poetic territory that has never before been explored?  Remember the Time of the entire Commedia: Easter Week, the Jubilee Year of 1300.  Never before means times have changed, and heaven means Time has changed.  Dante is entering a new era, which means a new state of awareness, and he, or his poem, is the midwife to that birth.  Think of the question of self in the Inferno.  What is happening to me?  Who is to blame?  Think of the question of self in the Purgatorio.  What have I done?  And what must die in me?  Now, think of the question of Self in the Paradiso.  To feel such an urge, is to leave the earth of the old self, and arrive in the heaven of the Self.  Here, in heaven, wonder births those questions of Self which can only birth new wonders, only exist as wonder.  What is at stake as we enter this new state?  Read and reread these lines:

25  Arrived I saw me where a wondrous thing
26  Drew to itself my sight; and therefore she
27  From whom no care of mine could be concealed,

25  giunto mi vidi ove mirabil cosa
26  mi torse il viso a sé; e però quella
27  cui non potea mia cura essere ascosa,

28  Towards me turning, blithe as beautiful,
29  Said unto me: "Fix gratefully thy mind
30  On God, who unto the first star has brought us."

28  volta ver' me, sì lieta come bella,
29  “Drizza la mente in Dio grata,” mi disse,
30  “che n'ha congiunti con la prima stella.”

31  It seemed to me a cloud encompassed us,
32  Luminous, dense, consolidate and bright
33  As adamant on which the sun is striking.

31  Parev' a me che nube ne coprisse
32  lucida, spessa, solida e pulita,
33  quasi adamante che lo sol ferisse.

34  Into itself did the eternal pearl
35  Receive us, even as water doth receive
36  A ray of light, remaining still unbroken.

34  Per entro sé l'etterna margarita
35  ne ricevette, com' acqua recepe
36  raggio di luce permanendo unita.

37  If I was body, (and we here conceive not
38  How one dimension tolerates another,
39  Which needs must be if body enter body,)

37  S'io era corpo, e qui non si concepe
38  com' una dimensione altra patio,
39  ch'esser convien se corpo in corpo repe,

40  More the desire should be enkindled in us
41  That essence to behold, wherein is seen
42  How God and our own nature were united.

40  accender ne dovria più il disio
41  di veder quella essenza in che si vede
42  come nostra natura e Dio s'unio.

43  There will be seen what we receive by faith,
44  Not demonstrated, but self-evident
45  In guise of the first truth that man believes.

43  Lì si vedrà ciò che tenem per fede,
44  non dimostrato, ma fia per sé noto
45  a guisa del ver primo che l'uom crede.

And what is the first wondrous question in Paradise?  It is a question of spots on the moon, and of that transgression of brother murdering brother, a question that asks: What is the matter? What indeed is matter that we should perceive it in the opposites of shadow and light, good and evil — and how is this question posed by the mutable moon?  This is an essential question.  Do  we speculate (remember speculum is mirror, is reflection, of the moon or of Beatrice's upward glancing eyes) from our everyday perceptions? or from the insights gathered from our souls?  What is the light/dark nature of our ethical musings and our sensual perceptions?  What is the grammer of it — because for Dante the moon and the trivium's subject of grammer are associates, the mutable structure of one reflecting the variations of the other, an issue that differentiates the question mark from the period, the equivocation from the assertion.  Here, then, Dante's question is at first answered by another question.  Beatrice quizzes: What do you think is the answer?  Dante replies: Substance must interact with light according to its thinness or density, simplicity or complexity.  Beatrice's answer refutes this, and so does the very nature of their current position dissolved and yet coherent in the pearlescent cloud of the moon.  Substance is light, or as Einstein put it, matter is energy.  All painters know this: shadows and lights are both luminescent areas called "values," each of their iterations as rich as all the others.  Differences are accounted for by the different qualities of light, their velocities relative to one another, not their substantive differences.  

As readers, we must remember that Dante lived in a time operating as a sort of background radiation which colored the form and content of his expression.  This background radiation is often only obliquely presented, especially in regards to his life circumstances at the time he was writing the poem.  He tells us nothing about where he is living, his patrons and hosts, his family, his health, his economic or his legal situation.  We might be interested in these aspects of his life, and we might learn much from them, but for him, they are only the paper on which he writes, a background which hardly pertains to the content of his poem.  In this he much differs from poets in my particular Now, who seem to concern themselves solely with this background.  In my view, this makes much of my contemporaries' poetry soul-ignorant and narcissistic, in many ways much like Dante's Francesca in the second circle of Hell.  Yes, we too live our lives as readers and recipients of his art enveloped in the field of our own era, and immersed in the individual circumstances in that Aion from which only those peculiarities of those circumstances could have arisen.  But if we read only from this sense, the Commedia will be very distant from us, and it will not be able to work its transformational magic.  In this final canticle, we are entering into the realm of scholasticism, i.e., of a kind of reasoning which in our age seems as tedious as it is false.  The relics of this scholasticism is what commentators of the Commedia have been exploring for eight centuries.  But this poem is not only an historical relic, not only the musings of a 14th Century Christian on the theological doctrines which might lead to what he called "salvation."  This poem is, as the first lines of this canto illustrate, also mythological, i.e., atemporal.  Its tropes, images, metaphors, sound and number patterns pose timeless questions.  The Commedia is just as pertinent when viewed through the prism of ours or of any age.  If the soul is, what is it?  And if it is the atemporal organizing power which makes matter matter, and Time both temporary and eternal, how must an individual intellect be schooled to play its part in the delights of the Universal Intellect?  Certainly, if we read in this way, we will find that sense of wonder which so awesomely arises when the deeper musings of our intellects meet with the deeper musing of an intellect from a far different place and time.  That is the power, as Jung re-discovered, of the archetype, whose numinous protean constant live in and forms the depths of our psyches.  In this second song of Paradise, we are launched, like that great ship of the poem whose passage begins this musing music, on a voyage to explore, as it pertains to us, each in our individual Now, the particular poetic Isness of this dimension. We are tasked to prepare our intellects for wonders.  Or as Beatrice says:

109  Thee thus remaining in thy intellect,
110  Will I inform with such a living light,
111  That it shall tremble in its aspect to thee.

109  così rimaso te ne l'intelletto
110  voglio informar di luce sì vivace,
111  che ti tremolerà nel suo aspetto.

112  Within the heaven of the divine repose
113  Revolves a body, in whose virtue lies
114  The being of whatever it contains.

112  Dentro dal ciel de la divina pace
113  si gira un corpo ne la cui virtute
112  l'esser di tutto suo contento giace.


		*****

1  O Ye, who in some pretty little boat,
2  Eager to listen, have been following
3  Behind my ship, that singing sails along,

1  O voi che siete in piccioletta barca,
2  desiderosi d'ascoltar, seguiti
3  dietro al mio legno che cantando varca,

4  Turn back to look again upon your shores;
5  Do not put out to sea, lest peradventure,
6  In losing me, you might yourselves be lost.

4  tornate a riveder li vostri liti:
5  non vi mettete in pelago, ché forse,
6  perdendo me, rimarreste smarriti.

7  The sea I sail has never yet been passed;
8  Minerva breathes, and pilots me Apollo,
9  And Muses nine point out to me the Bears.

7  L'acqua ch'io prendo già mai non si corse;
8  Minerva spira, e conducemi Appollo,
9  e nove Muse mi dimostran l'Orse.

10  Ye other few who have the neck uplifted
11  Betimes to th' bread of Angels upon which
12  One liveth here and grows not sated by it,

10  Voialtri pochi che drizzaste il collo
11  per tempo al pan de li angeli, del quale
12  vivesi qui ma non sen vien satollo,

13  Well may you launch upon the deep salt-sea
14   Your vessel, keeping still my wake before you
15  Upon the water that grows smooth again.

13  metter potete ben per l'alto sale
14  vostro navigio, servando mio solco
15  dinanzi a l'acqua che ritorna equale.

16  Those glorious ones who unto Colchos passed
17  Were not so wonder-struck as you shall be,
18  When Jason they beheld a ploughman made!

16  Que' glorïosi che passaro al Colco
17  non s'ammiraron come voi farete,
18  quando Iasón vider fatto bifolco.

19  The con-created and perpetual thirst
20  For the realm deiform did bear us on,
21  As swift almost as ye the heavens behold.

19  La concreata e perpetüa sete
20  del deïforme regno cen portava
21  veloci quasi come 'l ciel vedete.

22  Upward gazed Beatrice, and I at her;
23  And in such space perchance as strikes a bolt
24  And flies, and from the notch unlocks itself,

22  Beatrice in suso, e io in lei guardava;
23  e forse in tanto in quanto un quadrel posa
24  e vola e da la noce si dischiava,

25  Arrived I saw me where a wondrous thing
26  Drew to itself my sight; and therefore she
27  From whom no care of mine could be concealed,

25  giunto mi vidi ove mirabil cosa
26  mi torse il viso a sé; e però quella
27  cui non potea mia cura essere ascosa,

28  Towards me turning, blithe as beautiful,
29  Said unto me: "Fix gratefully thy mind
30  On God, who unto the first star has brought us."

28  volta ver' me, sì lieta come bella,
29  “Drizza la mente in Dio grata,” mi disse,
30  “che n'ha congiunti con la prima stella.”

31  It seemed to me a cloud encompassed us,
32  Luminous, dense, consolidate and bright
33  As adamant on which the sun is striking.

31  Parev' a me che nube ne coprisse
32  lucida, spessa, solida e pulita,
33  quasi adamante che lo sol ferisse.

34  Into itself did the eternal pearl
35  Receive us, even as water doth receive
36  A ray of light, remaining still unbroken.

34  Per entro sé l'etterna margarita
35  ne ricevette, com' acqua recepe
36  raggio di luce permanendo unita.

37  If I was body, (and we here conceive not
38  How one dimension tolerates another,
39  Which needs must be if body enter body,)

37  S'io era corpo, e qui non si concepe
38  com' una dimensione altra patio,
39  ch'esser convien se corpo in corpo repe,

40  More the desire should be enkindled in us
41  That essence to behold, wherein is seen
42  How God and our own nature were united.

40  accender ne dovria più il disio
41  di veder quella essenza in che si vede
42  come nostra natura e Dio s'unio.

43  There will be seen what we receive by faith,
44  Not demonstrated, but self-evident
45  In guise of the first truth that man believes.

43  Lì si vedrà ciò che tenem per fede,
44  non dimostrato, ma fia per sé noto
45  a guisa del ver primo che l'uom crede.

46  I made reply: "Madonna, as devoutly
47  As most I can do I give thanks to Him
48  Who has removed me from the mortal world.

46  Io rispuosi: “Madonna, sì devoto
47  com' esser posso più, ringrazio lui
48  lo qual dal mortal mondo m'ha remoto.

49  But tell me what the dusky spots may be
50  Upon this body, which below on earth
51  Make people tell that fabulous tale of Cain?"

49  Ma ditemi: che son li segni bui
50  di questo corpo, che là giuso in terra
51  fan di Cain favoleggiare altrui?”

52  Somewhat she smiled; and then, "If the opinion
53  Of mortals be erroneous," she said,
54  "Where'er the key of sense doth not unlock,

52  Ella sorrise alquanto, e poi “S'elli erra
53  l'oppinïon,” mi disse, “d'i mortali
54  dove chiave di senso non diserra,

55  Certes, the shafts of wonder should not pierce thee
56  Now, forasmuch as, following the senses,
57  Thou seest that the reason has short wings.

55  certo non ti dovrien punger li strali
56  d'ammirazione omai, poi dietro ai sensi
57  vedi che la ragione ha corte l'ali.

58  But tell me what thou think'st of it thyself."
59  And I: "What seems to us up here diverse,
60  Is caused, I think, by bodies rare and dense."

58  Ma dimmi quel che tu da te ne pensi.”
59  E io: “Ciò che n'appar qua sù diverso
60  credo che fanno i corpi rari e densi.”

61  And she: "Right truly shalt thou see immersed
62  In error thy belief, if well thou hearest
63  The argument that I shall make against it.

61  Ed ella: “Certo assai vedrai sommerso
62  nel falso il creder tuo, se bene ascolti
63  l'argomentar ch'io li farò avverso.

64  Lights many the eighth sphere displays to you
65  Which in their quality and quantity
66  May noted be of aspects different.

64  La spera ottava vi dimostra molti
65  lumi, li quali e nel quale e nel quanto
66  notar si posson di diversi volti.

67  If this were caused by rare and dense alone,
68  One only virtue would there be in all
69  Or more or less diffused, or equally.

67  Se raro e denso ciò facesser tanto,
68  una sola virtù sarebbe in tutti,
69  più e men distributa e altrettanto.

70  Virtues diverse must be perforce the fruits
71  Of formal principles; and these, save one,
72  Of course would by thy reasoning be destroyed.

70  Virtù diverse esser convegnon frutti
71  di princìpi formali, e quei, for ch'uno,
72  seguiterieno a tua ragion distrutti.

73  Besides, if rarity were of this dimness
74  The cause thou askest, either through and through
75  This planet thus attenuate were of matter,

73  Ancor, se raro fosse di quel bruno
74  cagion che tu dimandi, o d'oltre in parte
75  fora di sua materia sì digiuno

76  Or else, as in a body is apportioned
77  The fat and lean, so in like manner this
78  Would in its volume interchange the leaves.

76  esto pianeto, o, sì come comparte
77  lo grasso e 'l magro un corpo, così questo
78  nel suo volume cangerebbe carte.

79  Were it the former, in the sun's eclipse
80  It would be manifest by the shining through
81  Of light, as through aught tenuous interfused.

79  Se 'l primo fosse, fora manifesto
80  ne l'eclissi del sol, per trasparere
81  lo lume come in altro raro ingesto.

82  This is not so; hence we must scan the other,
83  And if it chance the other I demolish,
84  Then falsified will thy opinion be.

82  Questo non è: però è da vedere
83  de l'altro; e s'elli avvien ch'io l'altro cassi,
84  falsificato fia lo tuo parere.

85  But if this rarity go not through and through,
86  There needs must be a limit, beyond which
87  Its contrary prevents the further passing,

85  S'elli è che questo raro non trapassi,
86  esser conviene un termine da onde
87  lo suo contrario più passar non lassi;

88  And thence the foreign radiance is reflected,
89  Even as a colour cometh back from glass,
90  The which behind itself concealeth lead.

88  e indi l'altrui raggio si rifonde
89  così come color torna per vetro
90  lo qual di retro a sé piombo nasconde.

91  Now thou wilt say the sunbeam shows itself
92  More dimly there than in the other parts,
93  By being there reflected farther back.

91  Or dirai tu ch'el si dimostra tetro
92  ivi lo raggio più che in altre parti,
93  per esser lì refratto più a retro.

94  From this reply experiment will free thee
95  If e'er thou try it, which is wont to be
96  The fountain to the rivers of your arts.

94  Da questa instanza può deliberarti
95  esperïenza, se già mai la provi,
96  ch'esser suol fonte ai rivi di vostr' arti.

97  Three mirrors shalt thou take, and two remove
98  Alike from thee, the other more remote
99  Between the former two shall meet thine eyes.

97  Tre specchi prenderai; e i due rimovi
98  da te d'un modo, e l'altro, più rimosso,
99  tr'ambo li primi li occhi tuoi ritrovi.

100  Turned towards these, cause that behind thy back
101  Be placed a light, illuming the three mirrors
102  And coming back to thee by all reflected.

100  Rivolto ad essi, fa che dopo il dosso
101  ti stea un lume che i tre specchi accenda
102  e torni a te da tutti ripercosso.

103  Though in its quantity be not so ample
104  The image most remote, there shalt thou see
105  How it perforce is equally resplendent.

103  Ben che nel quanto tanto non si stenda
104  la vista più lontana, lì vedrai
105  come convien ch'igualmente risplenda.

106  Now, as beneath the touches of warm rays
107  Naked the subject of the snow remains
108  Both of its former colour and its cold,

106  Or, come ai colpi de li caldi rai
107   de la neve riman nudo il suggetto
108  e dal colore e dal freddo primai,

109  Thee thus remaining in thy intellect,
110  Will I inform with such a living light,
111  That it shall tremble in its aspect to thee.

109  così rimaso te ne l'intelletto
110  voglio informar di luce sì vivace,
111  che ti tremolerà nel suo aspetto.

112  Within the heaven of the divine repose
113  Revolves a body, in whose virtue lies
114  The being of whatever it contains.

112  Dentro dal ciel de la divina pace
113  si gira un corpo ne la cui virtute
112  l'esser di tutto suo contento giace.

115  The following heaven, that has so many eyes,
116  Divides this being by essences diverse,
117  Distinguished from it, and by it contained.

115  Lo ciel seguente, c'ha tante vedute,
116  quell' esser parte per diverse essenze,
117  da lui distratte e da lui contenute.

118  The other spheres, by various differences,
119  All the distinctions which they have within them
120  Dispose unto their ends and their effects.

118  Li altri giron per varie differenze
119  le distinzion che dentro da sé hanno
120  dispongono a lor fini e lor semenze.

121  Thus do these organs of the world proceed,
122  As thou perceivest now, from grade to grade;
123  Since from above they take, and act beneath.

121  Questi organi del mondo così vanno,
122  come tu vedi omai, di grado in grado,
123  che di sù prendono e di sotto fanno.

124  Observe me well, how through this place I come
125  Unto the truth thou wishest, that hereafter
126  Thou mayst alone know how to keep the ford

124  Riguarda bene omai sì com' io vado
125  per questo loco al vero che disiri,
126 sì che poi sappi sol tener lo guado.

127  The power and motion of the holy spheres,
128  As from the artisan the hammer's craft,
129  Forth from the blessed motors must proceed.

127  Lo moto e la virtù d'i santi giri,
128  come dal fabbro l'arte del martello,
129  da' beati motor convien che spiri;

130  The heaven, which lights so manifold make fair,
131  From the Intelligence profound, which turns it,
132  The image takes, and makes of it a seal.

130  e 'l ciel cui tanti lumi fanno bello,
131  de la mente profonda che lui volve
132  prende l'image e fassene suggello.

133  And even as the soul within your dust
134  Through members different and accommodated
135  To faculties diverse expands itself,

130  e 'l ciel cui tanti lumi fanno bello,
131  de la mente profonda che lui volve
132  prende l'image e fassene suggello.

136  So likewise this Intelligence diffuses
137  Its virtue multiplied among the stars.
138  Itself revolving on its unity.

130  e 'l ciel cui tanti lumi fanno bello,
131  de la mente profonda che lui volve
132  prende l'image e fassene suggello.

139  Virtue diverse doth a diverse alloyage
140  Make with the precious body that it quickens,
141  In which, as life in you, it is combined.

139  Virtù diversa fa diversa lega
140  col prezïoso corpo ch'ella avviva,
141  nel qual, sì come vita in voi, si lega.

142  From the glad nature whence it is derived,
143  The mingled virtue through the body shines,
144  Even as gladness through the living pupil.

142  Per la natura lieta onde deriva,
143  la virtù mista per lo corpo luce
144  come letizia per pupilla viva.

145  From this proceeds whate'er from light to light
146  Appeareth different, not from dense and rare:
147  This is the formal principle that produces,

145  Da essa vien ciò che da luce a luce
146  par differente, non da denso e raro;
147  essa è formal principio che produce,

148  According to its goodness, dark and bright."

148  conforme a sua bontà, lo turbo e 'l chiaro.”

Canto III
All of us are constantly bombarded with inner thoughts and outer perceptions.  We feel sensations, smell smells, taste tastes, hear sounds and see sights from both sides of the skin and skull and we record these myriad magnitudes, minitudes, and multitudes in the most complicated organic structure that we know of: our brains.  With the exceptions of some pheromone types of smells, everything that arises from this enormously complex and ever-active field is mediated by a network of cephalic nerves and neurotransmitters, which have been conditioned by the field itself to interpret and sort for relevance.  So, amidst this bombardment, how can we discern what is true, or what seems most relevant for us?  The first three lines of this canto reveal to us Dante's criteria for sorting wheat from chaff.  He says it is a feeling in his breast.  What kind of feeling?  A feeling of warmth, and specifically that warmth which his first vision of Beatrice at the age of nine enkindled in the region of his heart pump — perhaps a quickening that he interpreted as being warmed, as if by the sun.  This feeling, besides being warm, also seems beauteous to the inner vision (di bella) and sweet to the imagination's taste (dolce), and as he describes this feeling — his head bowed to check on what seems to be radiating from inside his chest — he discovers that the feeling is self-evident, a thing that uncovers (scoverto) its own qualities, proving and reproving its own authenticity.  From this feeling-state, then, Dante obtains the confidence to act by raising his head to speak.  Here we have the clear source of his certitude concerning those necessary credentials that enables a writer or speaker to become a poet.  He has said this before in previous cantos, but with each iteration, his poetry makes this clearer, and from the midst of this growing clarity, what does he see?  A vision, not through Saint Paul's "glass darkly," but as though through polished, transparent glass or crystalline, still water.  If we had not realized it before, the reader now knows Dante's neurological strategy 1 for creating poetry: Feel, see, hear, speak.  That is what is happening inside him, and it is happening in that order.  Knowing this, perhaps as readers, we should reverse engineer that neurological process.  Recite, listen, envision, and feel that realness, which seems to be the formula for enriching ourselves through these verses, as readers, just as Dante enriched himself through them as their writer.  These beginning verses of the canto describe "how" Dante is perceiving, or rather, creating, this experience.  This Howness is what he is invoking as a guide to the reader/listener.  This Howness is the map which frames and serves as a context or background for the Whatness which follows.

Now that we know the how, we are prepared to perceive the "what," the first part of which is the marvel (because as already promised, in Paradise, the marvelous is de rigueur) of multitudes of spirits appearing as apparitions, but — and here is the marvel — being, in truth, the actual condition of these post-mortem bodies, as Beatrice assures us.  We might want to think of these as non-physical, atemporal templates — what biologist Rupert Sheldrake might refer to as a "morphic resonance," through which physical, temporal bodies manifest, a field effect, which is so subtle that the forms are only as barely discernable, as the verses tell us, as a white pearl placed on a pallid forehead.  If the aspirant's experience described in the first six verses must be checked for its authenticity by comparing his present feeling with the memory of his feeling the first time he saw Beatrice, what follows is a return to an absolute presence, wherein his past is subsumed in a new vision, a vision which can only occur in a Paradise which is not segmented into the serpentine sequential movement of past-present-future.  Dante sees faces, which he falsely believes are projections of his own psyche.  We can ascertain this from the fact that — returning to the atemporal world of mythology — he flees from the fate of Narcissus, who, obsessed with his own reflection in water, attempted to mate with it, and was drowned.  Here, Dante has made a fundamental, and childish (puerile) mistake, seduced by an idea, which he fears he must reject or else be lost.  He has gone from one error — that the projections of the psyche are as physical as a physical body — to the opposite error — that these visions are mere projections, and thus inauthentic — untrue, unreal.  We can compare his state here with that of an earlier experience in the Purgatorio, wherein he was too ashamed to look at his reflection in the water, and instead, gazed on the grass.  His old habit of mind has certainly changed, but vestiges remain, as Beatrice reminds him in lines 28-30.  He has forgotten that the body which he now inhabits has been interpenetrated by the luminance of the moon, and has been enhanced by this transformation.  He is still in a physical body, but this body has been cleansed of much of its psychic neediness, and infused by the particular light of this moony sphere.  It is this phenomenon which has enabled him to perceive, through his newly reconditioned senses, these representations of an unearthly truth.  This truth exists simultaneously as figures of his own psyche and as something in the Universe.  He is seeing what is generally ungraspable through the ego-conditioned veils of sensory-based perception.  He is seeing what Jacques Lacan calls "The Real."2  Later, in the Commedia, the veracity of this vision might be amended, and once again we may be returned to the how of these representations, but for now, here, we are assured that these spirits, however the aspirant perceives them, are not mere products of either of Lacan's symbolic or imaginary orders.  They are denizens of The Real.  If as readers or listeners, we are not stunned by this marvel, this mundane marvel of Paradise, we should account ourselves as one of those doddering old people who have remained puerile in their conditioned perceptions, unable to see the wonders unfolding around them.  When we follow the text as aspirants, not just critics, we are also in need at this point of Beatrice's mild admonishment and reassurance: "Marvel not."  Keep your wits about you, and begin to train them to experience these things which arise as a challenge to your conditioned experience, these things which allow you to glimpse the light of The Real.  Dante's transcendence is not going to be a Buddhistic vision of the clear light of the void.  Personal identity, at least at this point, is enhanced, as in Jung's theory of Individuation.  Identity here has not been obliterated.  In this vision, we are one with the whole, always distinctly ourselves, but never separated.  Our point of nexus is, as Piccarda says, the will.  Our individual will is one with the divine will.  We flash back here to the previous canto wherein Beatrice explains that differences in light are not substantive, any more than notes on a scale are ethically lesser or greater than one another.  So too the souls in Paradise — though they experience narrower or wider domains of blessedness according to their individual capacities —  feel no diminution of bliss because their place  does not afford them "higher" states than they have.  All are suspended in the solute of the Divine's own state, as Piccarda tells us in lines 85-87.  I have always thought that this was one of the most hopeful revelations in the whole of the Commedia, this realization that wherever we are is the best place that we can be.  It is only in our present here and now that we can realize that we are inextricably and holographically a part of the entire cosmos.  Perhaps we could think of this as the I AM of the godhead, but an I AM brought down to the level of our individual aspirations.  Any moment can become eternal the instant that we come to realize that everything we may have desired for ourselves is best obtained when our desires are aligned with the harmony of the whole.  We should also remember at this point, despite, or rather because of, the reference to the sun in the first line, that we are still in the resonance field of what the text calls "The Moon," which, like a tonal mode in music, or as line 51 says in la spera più tarda ( in the slowest of the spheres), colors everything we see or hear in its domain.  We know this because, returning to the metaphor of lines 14 and 15, this subtle state is compared to the luminous quality of a pearl seen on a pearlescent forehead (perhaps an archetypal vision of Diana or Minerva, with their moon disc headbands), and also because the aspirant confesses that his memory of the faces he sees also works more slowly.  The moon, the pearl, the spirits, the aspirant's memory and his perceptions are all vibrating in the same resonance field, their frequencies all tones or siblings of the same metaphoric mode — moony pearlescent lights slowly dancing in a certain family of pitches to form the features of faces.  

The Moon is a female place, an anima place — to again barrow a Jungian term — and the spirits met here are those of women.  When they speak to Dante, their faces are alight in love's first fire (d'amor nel primo foco), a phrase that echoes that of the first line of the canto.  It should be noted, that just as the text does in the first verses, throughout the canto we find figurations denoting music, taste, weaving, feeling, light, gesture — the whole gamut really of sensory-based perceptions, but all raised to this higher key of spirit.  The slowness motif concludes the appearance of Piccarda as she exits, singing Ave Maria "like something heavy through deep water," (come per aqua cupa cosa grave line 123).  The light of Beatrice's eyes — the sight again of his first love — flashes so brightly that the aspirant is blinded, and the canto ends with a reminder of slowness, as Dante is delayed in asking his questions — again più tardo.  The feeling quality of the entire canto takes on the effect of being in some luminous flotation tank3, as we feel ourselves suspended in the solute of a uterine bliss — an ideal state for the inception of boundary-blurring ideas and the ability to associate and conflate diverse images.  This is a remarkable poetic performance, but one whose marvelous aspect has become, for all of its commonness throughout the Commedia, no less wondrous because we have been schooled to expect it.  Dante makes this clear, that as the intellect is schooled in the marvelous, it becomes more capable of experiencing the miracles which his poetry has to offer.  To me, it seems as if we are experiencing a theology of the aesthetics of reading, and the more we absorb this theology and apply it in our everyday lives, the more transformative it becomes.4     

This canto deals with two linked issues: The Will and The Vow.  It deals with the whom and the what and the how of their domains.  We have already dealt above with the will, but we might succinctly say that the will can choose but one of two directions on its path.  If the will follows in the direction of "what's in it for me," the individual eventually is at odds with the harmony of the whole.  All of the Commedia's Inferno deals with the horrible consequences which devolve when this path is obstinately followed to its extreme.  This narcissistic obsession is the logic of evil.  In the other direction, when the path is followed towards what helps to harmonize the whole, we find bliss.   Our will is ecologically and psychologically aligned with the highest possible purposes.  Here, the individual will becomes the cosmological will.   Now how does this pertain to The Vow?  Well, clearly, no vow is possible without the will to fulfill it.  Here we find ourselves at the crux of what in English we would call a promise, an oath, or a vow, similar, but hardly synonymous obligations.  We could surmise here that the promise belongs wholly to the human temporal realm.  Indeed, Nietzsche argues that the ability to make and keep promises is the attribute which makes us human.  In a sense, the entire idea of the promise must always involve the idea of freedom.  A promise binds, and causes us always — no matter how far we have travelled through time from its inception — to the initial conditions in which the promise was made.  Hanna Arendt refers to this memory attribute of the promise as it pertains to the political or public sphere, and she points out that paradoxically it is the people's ability to adhere to those promises enshrined in communal laws, which also ensures their freedom.  Collectively, we surrender a portion of our freedoms to the public good, so that we may be free to be free.  In this she argues we are dependent in our human condition on memory, the ability to renew that first promise as to why we banded together to begin with.  But she also ties this surrender to memory's constraints to that state of forgiveness, which allows us the freedom to be fallible, fallible even at times to transgress the laws we have promised to keep, even when the ends of a strict justice are not served.  In a mutating and mutable world, the circumstances in which our promises are constantly changing, sometimes being favorable, sometimes contrary 5 — the presence of forgiveness is as necessary to the preservation of freedom as is the presence of memory.  This is precisely the case in this canto with Piccarda and Costanza.  In the human world of promises, their breaking of their vows is forgivable, because both women were compelled against their personal wills to break their promises.  If the ability to keep promises is dependent on memory, the need to be free from them in a changing world, is dependent on forgetfulness.  Nietzsche argues that we must forget that we are animals to become human, and conversely to be human requires the ability to make and keep promises.  It is easy to see how these dilemmas of a human will — bound by the oscillations of submission/surrender vs. freedom/licence, or memory/tradition vs. adaptability/forgetfulness — have landed us in the mortal realm of the play of opposites, an immutable condition for mutable bodies operating  in a temporal world.  But in the Paradiso, as Beatrice reminds Dante in the previous canto, we are not on Earth, we are not in a mutable, temporal world, we are beyond that, in the metaposition of the Divine, and from this position, we are in the world of oath and vow.  To be clear about this, we can refer to Thomas Aquinas, who said:      
The obligation both of a vow and of an oath arises from something Divine; but in different ways.  For the obligation of a vow arises from the fidelity we owe God, which binds us to fulfil our promises to Him.  On the other hand, the obligation of an oath arises from the reverence we owe Him which binds us to fulfil our promises to Him. 
Summa Theologica, Volume 3, Part II, Second Section

If a promise is a mutual commitment between humans, this lacks that sense of obligation which pertains to the oath, in which the divine, or the whole of the cosmos, bears witness to the contract.  But the vow exceeds even the obligation of the oath, because in that case the entirety of the cosmos is one of the parties of the contract.   More than three decades ago, I read of a sculptor who had vowed to carve 10,000 Buddhas.  That idea intrigued me — or to be more precise: entrapped me.  So much so that I vowed to write 10,000 poems.  10,000 is a big number.  To write 10,000 poems, one must write a poem every day for 27 years and 4 months.  I have fulfilled that vow, and I continue to fulfill it.  During my life, like most of us, I have broken many resolutions and promises, and have failed, to my everlasting shame, to fulfill things that I called vows — even marriage vows — but that one vow I have managed to keep.  During these decades, so many temporal circumstances arose that might have prohibited me from keeping my vow to write — sickness, relocations, work and family obligations, financial stress — the list goes on and on — but none of those potential interferences interfered.  One could say that it is not the vow that I am fulfilling, but the vow which is fulfilling me.  Although I have tried again and again to give other very important things the eternal quality of this domain of the vow, in every other instance at some point these promises and resolutions were relaxed, broken, or forgotten.  When we read this canto, we might be very critical of the Divine's punishment — although we can hardly think of it as such — of these spirits who in life broke their sacred promises, not by a failure of their own will, but through the compulsions imposed upon them by more powerful others.  In brief, although these women never varied in their intentions, those powerful circumstances in this mutable world, in the end, ruled them, and by their surrender, they proved that what they had attempted to fulfill was only a temporal, not an atemporal obligation, and the moment those outer circumstances crushed or overwhelmed them, was the moment that their vows descended from the eternal world to the temporal one.  Their fault, if it can be called that, was hardly a failure of their personal will, but that did not, does not, matter.  Their human fallibility broke its connection to the entirety.  They lost connection with those very currents which alone could have enabled them to fulfill their vows.  Years ago, I read something from Delores LaChapelle, the mountaineer, cross-country skier, and pioneer deep ecologist.  She said, Nature will always give you "affordances."   I took this word "affordances" to mean that no matter how rugged or seemingly impassable is the physical or metaphysical terrain we are trying to traverse, if our will is mated with the landscape we will see what no one else could see in the same circumstances — that is to say — a way over, a way around, a way through.  The whole of the Commedia is a chronicle of that way over, that way around, that way through, which Dante found as a poet in a world that so often defeated him as a man.  Dante, the poet, knew about those affordances, and they made a path for him through exile and betrayal.  Each word, each syllable and sound of this poem was to him like a mountaineer’s faith in the rockface  — a metaphor he uses at the beginning of Inferno — a place to place one's faith — a place lower down no doubt on the cliff— but one from which he might place his foot to climb.  This poem, it seems to me, is a living example of the power of the vow, and if we read it in the right spirit, we will get a sense of how a strength beyond anything that we might personally summon exists for us in the very structure of the Universe, if we can align ourselves with it.           



1. For more detailed information on neurological strategies, check Jan Seager's website (https://www.easychangeworks.com/articles-nlp/markova-1-intro.htm) or Dawna Markova's book: Open Mind: Exploring the 6 Patterns of Natural Intelligence.

2. See An Introductory Dictionary of Lacanian Psychoanalysis, Dylan Evans.  Lacan theorizes that all psychic experience is divided into three orders: The Symbolic, The Imaginary, and The Real.  The Real is that which exists, not as a play of opposites, such as absence and presence, as is the Symbolic, but as "absolutely without fissure."  The Real is always present, but we do not ordinarily perceive it because it is usually beyond the symbolization of language.  We do not live in our corporeal bodies in The Real, but in the brain's simulation of The Real, in the orders of symbolization and imagination (see I of the Vortex: From Neurons to Self, Rodolfo R. Llinás) .  Here, in Paradise, having transcended the ordinal/temporal/ corporeal, we are indeed able to perceive some aspects of The Real.

3. The flotation or sensory isolation tank was an invention of John C. Lily, and a brief history of its application and effects can be found in a book he wrote with E. J. Gold, entitled "Tanks for the Memories."  The original idea of the tank was to study the effects of extreme solitude, which we have evidence of in such cross-cultural practices such as meditation, prayer, initiation rites, and so forth.  This kind of solitude was deeply enhanced in the complete sensory isolation of the tank.  Read the following quote from their book, and by reading I mean enter the altered state of consciousness that deep reading confers,    

You go into the tank, and the tank is a functional exit and entry point to tis universe.  In the tank you no longer have to relate to or communicate with anyone.  You are completely alone.  You are free from the tank to move out of and back into the universe.  The tank does not obey the same laws that this universe obeys.  The tank is not created under the same laws.  IT violates many laws in this universe, and as you work more and more toward become a transit operator, you will find that these laws that are violated will be pointed out to you.  You'll discover the laws that are violated and why they are violated and how they can be violated in that kind of space.

When you get into the tank you can focus on several questions, one of why is,

Who are you really apart from your identity?

You know that you are not your identity.  You know that your identity limits you.

When you let go of your identity, who are you?
What creates you individuality?

Another question you could ask is,

How can you break free now from the physical limitations of the tank?

Those who became proficient in the use of this tank, experienced a "transit" state, in which they could leave the ordinarily conditioning of their brains, and from a place of stillness and void, travel, as they said, to "different universes."  Dante seems to have used poetry, and reading in general, to effect a similar "transit" state whereby he could travel to the worlds he creates in the Commedia.  Throughout, he emphasizes the absolute reality of the Commedia's universe, and in this canto, through his avatar, Beatrice, he again reiterates this position.  The Commedia's universe is not "mere" psychic projection or fantasy.  Nor is it simply the reiteration of a certain kind of historic Christian theology.  It is its own universe, with its own geographies and laws.  The experience of "expert" users of the tank and of Dante and of Dr. Stan Groff's holotropic breathing, to name a few possible examples, is no different from that of the desert fathers, or of the Rishi's of ancient India, or of the Chinese sages of The Secret of the Golden Flower, or of any number of shamanic figures from traditional cultures.  The world that they encountered in these depths is a real, or even the real world.  Either this other world is an alternative to the world of ordinary consciousness, or it is one whose light reveals ordinary consciousness to be a sham.  The committed readers of the Commedia begin to have these same realizations.

4. This relationship of our everyday perception of events and the process of reading seems greatly enhanced when we read Dante's poetry.  Far from being a mere description or even an analog of reality, this poetry is mimetic of reality in the sense that our response to the poem is the same as our response to what we imagine to be real.  I would even go so far as to say that the experience of reading this poem outpaces our ordinary experience of reality and becomes that super stimulus which I am calling an aesthetic theology of reading.  A quote from A. N. Whitehead, which Wolfgang Iser uses in his book, The Act of Reading: A theory of Aesthetic Response, presents a similar proposition.  Whitehead's position and Isher's commentary appear below.  Both seem pertinent here, when we consider the impact the Commedia has had on centuries of serious readers.  That the act of reading might become a super stimulous, especially when we engage a text as highly — one might even say — as organically organized as is this poem of Dante's, is one way to account for Dante's insistence that the world he presents in the Commedia is as real and in some cases more real than the world which he embodies in it.  

One all-pervasive fact, inherent in the very character of what is real is the transition* of things, the passage one to another.  This passage is not a mere linear precession of discrete entities.  However we fix a determinate entity, there is always a narrower determination of something which is presupposed in our first choice.  Also there is always a wider determination into which our first choice fades by transition beyond itself ... These unities, which I call events, are the emergence into actuality of something.  How are we to characterize the something which thus emerges?  The same 'event' given to such a unity, draws attention to the inherent transitoriness, combined with the actual unity.  But this abstract word cannot be sufficient to characterize what the fact of the reality of the event is in itself.  A moment's thought shows us that no one idea can in itself be sufficient.  For every idea which finds its significance in each event must represent something which contributes to what realization is in itself ... Aesthetic attainment is interwoven in the texture of realization.  

A. N. Whitehead, Science and the Modern World.

* The transition of things is of course what the entire Commedia is about, which is why, perhaps even more than Virgil, it's guiding light is Ovid's Metamorphosis.



To which statement Iser comments:

Events are a paradigm of reality in that they designate a process and are not merely a "discrete" entity.  Each event represents the intersecting point of a variety of circumstances, but circumstances also change the event as soon as it has taken on a shape.  As a shape, it marks off certain borderlines, so that these may then be transcended in the continuous process of realization that constitutes reality.  In literature, where the reader is constantly feeding back reaction as he obtains new information there is just such a continual process of realization, and so reading itself  'happens' like an event, in the sense that what we read takes on the character of an open-ended situation, at one and the same time concrete and yet fluid.  The concreteness arises out of each new attitude we are forced to adopt toward the text, and the fluidity out of the fact that each new attitude bears the seeds of its own modification.  Reading, then, is experienced as something which is happening — and happening is the hallmark of reality.  For Whitehead the process of realization entails aesthetic attainment because reality can only be conceived in a sequence of transitory shapes.  These shapes are the signifieds which are in reading constantly being shifted into different situational frames, thus effecting a constant shift of position.  The text can never be grasped as a whole — only as a series of changing viewpoints, each one restricted in itself and so necessitating further perspectives.  This is the process by which the reader 'realizes' an overall situation.

Of course Whitehead's position and Iser's use of it, still beg the question of how the happening of reading might change once the entire text is read and thoroughly assimilated.  Does, in fact, this sequential transitoriness with all its mutating parts, gel into a single, timeless unity?  That is the question that occupies Dante in the Paradiso.

It should be noted that the Heaven of the Moon, which is where we are in this canto, is to be associated, according to the commentators and medieval tradition, with grammar, the first subject and the foundation of the Trivium.  Always underlying Dante's poetry there flows a fundamental aspect of mind and learning, and since grammar is the foundation upon which all higher attainments of the intellect depend, it is associated with this first of the seven heavens which constitute paradise.  His is a totum pole arrangement, with the most basic, and in some sense, the most aesthetically crucial figuration supports the weight of all the others.

Obviously this text is not a fanciful recapitulation of scholastism or a didactic lesson plan for the soul.  It is poetry, and poetry of a genre which comes closest in its style and aim to the kind of scripture we find in the Bible.  Yet, as deep as this connection is, I think this poem is from a genre no longer generally recognize in the Western Canon, although it still has a lively popular presense in the so-called "self-help" book.  In his book, A Story as Sharp as a Knife, The Classical Haida mythtellers and their World, Robert Bringhurst discusses the oral stories and myths of a highly sophisticated preliterate culture.  Stories are acted, sung, danced, carved into totums, worn as masks and costumes, and tatooed and painted on the very skin of the body, and not merely appropriated by what Rudolf Stiener referred to when he said that North American aborigines deplored and feared the letters which trapped sounds in written alphabets' little demons.  Bringhurst, in catagorizing the literature of the Haida culuture of the Northwest Pacific Coast, speaks of a genre "almost lost in European literature."  He calls the artifacts of this genere "medicine stories."  They are the "tales of vision quests and the spiritual journeys of shamans."  Although he says that these medicine stories are, like myths, generally told in the third person, they are "set in historical time."  The Commedia seems to be just this type of medicine story, but told in the first person to establish an intimate one on one connection of speaker to listener.  This poem is medicine, not only for the soul of the reader, but also for this historical soul of humankind.  For Dante that humankind soul was expressed in the turbulant and violent politics of the Italian penisula and throughout the old domains of the Roman Empire.  Perhaps, by choosing to write this medicine story in the vulgate and not in Latin, Dante is aligning his work with the old oral traditions of motherese that still danced and played with the healing spirits of speech acts before they were imprisoned by the alphabet's little demons.  In order for those demons to really do their medicinal work, I think we are required to once again release them, as we should all great poetry, in the ritual act of divinely enhanced and inspired speech.  

How should we go about reconstituting this written recipe for soul medicine, and what would this poetry be like if it were truly freed to perform its true function?  It might look like some sort of wild combination of Steiner's eurythmy visalble speech dance gestures, Antonin's revitalized theater, a high Catholic mass, a rave, and a Saint Vitus dance — but of course, all this would be an interior event, an act of Vipassana-like meditation, whose stillness embodied all the possible activities of life in the constant throes of transformation.  

5. For a further analysis of these issues see "Memory and Promise in Arendt and Nietzsche" by Vanessa Lemm (https://scielo.conicyt.cl/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pid=S0718-090X2006000200009)  Note: However one thinks or feels about Nietzsche’s and/or Arendt's concepts of memory and forgetfulness, will and freedom, individuality and plurality, one thing is for sure that their concepts of promise are tied to the human realm which is subject to vicissitudes of time.  The original sin of Christianity is to be born in a temporal world, and to accept that world as the sole reality.
 
1  That Sun, which erst with love my bosom warmed,
2  Of beauteous truth had unto me discovered,
3  By proving and reproving, the sweet aspect.

1  Quel sol che pria d'amor mi scaldò 'l petto,
2  di bella verità m'avea scoverto,
3  provando e riprovando, il dolce aspetto;

4  And, that I might confess myself convinced
5  And confident, so far as was befitting,
6  I lifted more erect my head to speak.

4  e io, per confessar corretto e certo
5  me stesso, tanto quanto si convenne
6  leva' il capo a proferer più erto;

7  But there appeared a vision, which withdrew me
8  So close to it, in order to be seen,
9  That my confession I remembered not.

7  ma visïone apparve che ritenne
8  a sé me tanto stretto, per vedersi,
9  che di mia confession non mi sovvenne.

10  Such as through polished and transparent glass,
11  Or waters crystalline and undisturbed,
12  But not so deep as that their bed be lost,

10  Quali per vetri trasparenti e tersi,
11  o ver per acque nitide e tranquille,
12  non sì profonde che i fondi sien persi,

13  Come back again the outlines of our faces
14  So feeble, that a pearl on forehead white
15  Comes not less speedily unto our eyes;

13  tornan d'i nostri visi le postille
14  debili sì, che perla in bianca fronte
15  non vien men forte a le nostre pupille;

16  Such saw I many faces prompt to speak,
17  So that I ran in error opposite
18  To that which kindled love 'twixt man and fountain.

16  tali vid' io più facce a parlar pronte;
17  per ch'io dentro a l'error contrario corsi
18  a quel ch'accese amor tra l'omo e 'l fonte.


19  As soon as I became aware of them,
20  Esteeming them as mirrored semblances,
21  To see of whom they were, mine eyes I turned,

19  Sùbito sì com' io di lor m'accorsi,
20  quelle stimando specchiati sembianti,
21  per veder di cui fosser, li occhi torsi;

22  And nothing saw, and once more turned them forward
23  Direct into the light of my sweet Guide,
24  Who smiling kindled in her holy eyes.

22  e nulla vidi, e ritorsili avanti
23  dritti nel lume de la dolce guida,
24  che, sorridendo, ardea ne li occhi santi.

25  "Marvel thou not," she said to me, "because
26  I smile at this thy puerile conceit,
27  Since on the truth it trusts not yet its foot,

25  “Non ti maravigliar perch' io sorrida,”
26  mi disse, “appresso il tuo püeril coto,
27  poi sopra 'l vero ancor lo piè non fida,

28  But turns thee, as 'tis wont, on emptiness.
29  True substances are these which thou beholdest,
30  Here relegate for breaking of some vow.

28  ma te rivolve, come suole, a vòto:
29  vere sustanze son ciò che tu vedi,
30  qui rilegate per manco di voto.

31  Therefore speak with them, listen and believe;
32  For the true light, which giveth peace to them,
33  Permits them not to turn from it their feet."

31  Però parla con esse e odi e credi;
32  ché la verace luce che le appaga
33  da sé non lascia lor torcer li piedi.”

34  And I unto the shade that seemed most wishful
35  To speak directed me, and I began,
36  As one whom too great eagerness bewilders:

34  E io a l'ombra che parea più vaga
35  di ragionar, drizza'mi, e cominciai,
36  quasi com' uom cui troppa voglia smaga:

37  "O well-created spirit, who in the rays
38  Of life eternal dost the sweetness taste
39  Which being untasted ne'er is comprehended,

37  “O ben creato spirito, che a' rai
38  di vita etterna la dolcezza senti
39  che, non gustata, non s'intende mai,

40  Grateful 'twill be to me, if thou content me
41  Both with thy name and with your destiny."
42  Whereat she promptly and with laughing eyes:

40  grazïoso mi fia se mi contenti
41  del nome tuo e de la vostra sorte.”
42  Ond' ella, pronta e con occhi ridenti:

43  "Our charity doth never shut the doors
44  Against a just desire, except as one
45  Who wills that all her court be like herself.

43  “La nostra carità non serra porte
44  a giusta voglia, se non come quella
45  che vuol simile a sé tutta sua corte.

46  I was a virgin sister in the world;
47  And if thy mind doth contemplate me well,
48  The being more fair will not conceal me from thee,

46  I' fui nel mondo vergine sorella;
47  e se la mente tua ben sé riguarda,
48  non mi ti celerà l'esser più bella,

49  But thou shalt recognise I am Piccarda,
50  Who, stationed here among these other blessed,
51  Myself am blessed in the slowest sphere.

49  ma riconoscerai ch'i' son Piccarda,
50  che, posta qui con questi altri beati,
51  beata sono in la spera più tarda.

52  All our affections, that alone inflamed
53  Are in the pleasure of the Holy Ghost,
54  Rejoice at being of his order formed;

52  Li nostri affetti, che solo infiammati
53  son nel piacer de lo Spirito Santo,
54  letizian del suo ordine formati.

55  And this allotment, which appears so low,
56  Therefore is given us, because our vows
57  Have been neglected and in some part void."

55  E questa sorte che par giù cotanto,
56  però n'è data, perché fuor negletti
57  li nostri voti, e vòti in alcun canto.”

58  Whence I to her: "In your miraculous aspects
59  There shines I know not what of the divine,
60  Which doth transform you from our first conceptions.

58  Ond' io a lei: “Ne' mirabili aspetti
59  vostri risplende non so che divino
60  che vi trasmuta da' primi concetti:

61  Therefore I was not swift in my remembrance;
62  But what thou tellest me now aids me so,
63  That the refiguring is easier to me.

61  però non fui a rimembrar festino;
62  ma or m'aiuta ciò che tu mi dici,
63  sì che raffigurar m'è più latino.

64  But tell me, ye who in this place are happy,
65  Are you desirous of a higher place,
66  To see more or to make yourselves more friends?"

64  Ma dimmi: voi che siete qui felici,
65  disiderate voi più alto loco
66  per più vedere e per più farvi amici?”

67  First with those other shades she smiled a little;
68  Thereafter answered me so full of gladness,
69  She seemed to burn in the first fire of love:

67  Con quelle altr' ombre pria sorrise un poco;
68  da indi mi rispuose tanto lieta,
69  ch'arder parea d'amor nel primo foco:

70  "Brother, our will is quieted by virtue
71   Of charity, that makes us wish alone
72   For what we have, nor gives us thirst for more.

70  “Frate, la nostra volontà quïeta
71  virtù di carità, che fa volerne
72  sol quel ch'avemo, e d'altro non ci asseta.

73  If to be more exalted we aspired,
74  Discordant would our aspirations be
75  Unto the will of Him who here secludes us;

73  Se disïassimo esser più superne,
74  foran discordi li nostri disiri
75  dal voler di colui che qui ne cerne;

76  Which thou shalt see finds no place in these circles,
77  If being in charity is needful here,
78  And if thou lookest well into its nature;

76  che vedrai non capere in questi giri,
77  s'essere in carità è qui necesse,
78  e se la sua natura ben rimiri.

79  Nay, 'tis essential to this blest existence
80  To keep itself within the will divine,
81  Whereby our very wishes are made one;

79  Anzi è formale ad esto beato esse
80  tenersi dentro a la divina voglia,
81  per ch'una fansi nostre voglie stesse;

82  So that, as we are station above station
83  Throughout this realm, to all the realm 'tis pleasing,
84  As to the King, who makes his will our will.

82  sì che, come noi sem di soglia in soglia
83  per questo regno, a tutto il regno piace
84  com' a lo re che 'n suo voler ne 'nvoglia.

85  And his will is our peace; this is the sea
86  To which is moving onward whatsoever
87  It doth create, and all that nature makes."

85  E 'n la sua volontade è nostra pace:
86  ell' è quel mare al qual tutto si move
87  ciò ch'ella crïa o che natura face.”

88  Then it was clear to me how everywhere
89  In heaven is Paradise, although the grace
90  Of good supreme there rain not in one measure.

88  Chiaro mi fu allor come ogne dove
89  in cielo è paradiso, etsi la grazia
90  del sommo ben d'un modo non vi piove.

91  But as it comes to pass, if one food sates,
92  And for another still remains the longing,
93  We ask for this, and that decline with thanks,

91  Ma sì com' elli avvien, s'un cibo sazia
92  e d'un altro rimane ancor la gola,
93  che quel si chere e di quel si ringrazia,

94  E'en thus did I; with gesture and with word,
95  To learn from her what was the web wherein
96  She did not ply the shuttle to the end.

94  così fec' io con atto e con parola,
95  per apprender da lei qual fu la tela
96  onde non trasse infino a co la spuola.

97  "A perfect life and merit high in-heaven
98  A lady o'er us," said she, "by whose rule
99  Down in your world they vest and veil themselves,

97  “Perfetta vita e alto merto inciela
98  donna più sù,” mi disse, “a la cui norma
99  nel vostro mondo giù si veste e vela,

100  That until death they may both watch and sleep
101  Beside that Spouse who every vow accepts
102  Which charity conformeth to his pleasure.

100  perché fino al morir si vegghi e dorma
101  con quello sposo ch'ogne voto accetta
102  che caritate a suo piacer conforma.

103  To follow her, in girlhood from the world
104  I fled, and in her habit shut myself,
105  And pledged me to the pathway of her sect.

103  Dal mondo, per seguirla, giovinetta
104  fuggi'mi, e nel suo abito mi chiusi
105  e promisi la via de la sua setta.

106  Then men accustomed unto evil more
107  Than unto good, from the sweet cloister tore me;
108  God knows what afterward my life became.

106  Uomini poi, a mal più ch'a bene usi,
107  fuor mi rapiron de la dolce chiostra:
108  Iddio si sa qual poi mia vita fusi.

109  This other splendour, which to thee reveals
110  Itself on my right side, and is enkindled
111  With all the illumination of our sphere,

109  E quest' altro splendor che ti si mostra
110  da la mia destra parte e che s'accende
111   di tutto il lume de la spera nostra,

112  What of myself I say applies to her;
113  A nun was she, and likewise from her head
114  Was ta'en the shadow of the sacred wimple.

112  ciò ch'io dico di me, di sé intende;
113  sorella fu, e così le fu tolta
114  di capo l'ombra de le sacre bende.

115  But when she too was to the world returned
116  Against her wishes and against good usage,
117  Of the heart's veil she never was divested.

115  Ma poi che pur al mondo fu rivolta
116  contra suo grado e contra buona usanza,
117  non fu dal vel del cor già mai disciolta.

118  Of great Costanza this is the effulgence,
119  Who from the second wind of Suabia
120  Brought forth the third and latest puissance."

118  Quest' è la luce de la gran Costanza
119  che del secondo vento di Soave
120  generò 'l terzo e l'ultima possanza.”

121  Thus unto me she spake, and then began
122  "Ave Maria" singing, and in singing
123  Vanished, as through deep water something heavy.

121  Così parlommi, e poi cominciò “Ave,
122  Maria” cantando, e cantando vanio
123  come per acqua cupa cosa grave.

124  My sight, that followed her as long a time
125  As it was possible, when it had lost her
126  Turned round unto the mark of more desire,

124  La vista mia, che tanto lei seguio
125  quanto possibil fu, poi che la perse,
126  volsesi al segno di maggior disio

127  And wholly unto Beatrice reverted;
128  But she such lightnings flashed into mine eyes,
129  That at the first my sight endured it not;

127  e a Beatrice tutta si converse;
128  ma quella folgorò nel mïo sguardo
129  sì che da prima il viso non sofferse;

130  And this in questioning more backward made me.

130  e ciò mi fece a dimandar più tardo.

Canto IV
Although ostensibly this canto — as is the previous one — is about human will and the vow, or as I have rather arbitrarily tried to translate this to a more 21st Century me-key, i.e., Nietzsche’s and Arendt's definition of the human as one who can make and keep promises, it begins to dawn on the reader that for Dante the human is uniquely ensouled by an ability to ask and answer questions.  Whatever the topic at hand, this is what is happening throughout the Commedia — a continuous ask and answer — or to put it in liturgical terms, a call and response.  This poetic technique plays out in the form of dialog, a method that allows the text to pack a tremendous depth of knowledge and experience into a highly condensed format, insofar as any dialog necessarily springs the entire worldview of the participants, and thus allows for ever-deepening interpretations.  Conversations do the same, but they are not quite the same kinds of exchanges as the dialogue, which can be unpacked  to reveal far more sources of knowledge. And yet there is so much near-redundancy in the aspirant's questions in this canto, so much apparent dry-as-sticks theology in Beatrice's patient schoolmarm answers, that one wonders how the protagonist Dante, even if still drunk on the waters of Lethe, can remain such a dope, and an attentive reader who has followed the poet Dante's subtlety of thought and perception through 70 cantos of the poem begins to wonder if there is not a little leg-pulling going on here, an ironic smile behind the solemn pronouncements, like that of an altar boy who finds the sermon a little too dull and begins to entertain himself with secondary thoughts about why the words sound so weird, or why the lights through the stained glass windows are whirling clownish patches across the celebrants' faces.  Maybe there's a hidden subtlety here too, hinted at by Beatrice when she explains in a convoluted fashion that the surface of Plato's thought has misled many credentialed scholastics to misinterpret as false doctrine that which is hidden but true.  Is this a clue?  Are we dealing with irony here or are we not dealing with irony, the answer depends upon how the reader defines the context of their experience in reading, a topic which will be explored in some detail below.  But suffice it to say that the two types of interpretation are not mutually exclusive, this text, jewel-like in the sense that as you turn each facet to or away from the light of our mood while reading, it shines forth accordingly.  For now, we can say that inner and outer or text and context are insolubly connected, but may be quite divergent in their expressions.  Examples: Dante the aspirant's dumb student act, masking Dante the poet's sly sagacity.  Beatrice's dusty scholastic obscurantisms sparking out of a radiant appearance.  If we are going to say that the child's emotive state is the one that has kept burgeoning its primal intensity in the adult aspirant and ecstatic poet, then it's best to return to that moment when the child Dante first saw the child Beatrice, because there seems to be an almost deliberate intellectual regression here, as if, until all that the adult might have learned from the experience of maturing in a rotten fallen world is wiped clean, the naive child — frozen, desiring, and fearful in his attempt to orient himself in the confusing whirl of his powerful, inchoate emotions — cannot develop until he is re-educated to live as was first intended in love's Eden.  The tropes seem to be 1) mother/species dependence, i.e., dependence on the conditions of physical existence, the same if you are an insect, an alligator, a human being, an amoeba,  2) cultural dependence, that is, things like prestige, image, reputation, popularity, celebrity, and their obverse, ignominy, ostracization, ridicule, and the like, 3) sexual dependence, not just sexuality and the pleasure of mating, but any carnal pleasure: drinking, eating, smoking, or even the pleasures of denials and austerities, such as picking scabs, biting nails, forcing yourself to vomit, and so forth ... and then there is something that is utterly transcendent, some Jungian quaternity of fulfillment, the fourth being inclusive of the other three, but something qualitatively different, and far, far more than the sum of its parts.  In fact, it is the absolute sum, the unifying, harmonizing whole that continually births variety and continually enfolds and embraces that variety in an ever-new wholeness.  Dante's Eden opened when he saw as a child, the child Beatrice.  The child, as Wordsworth's poem famously told us, is the father of the man, and in his Vita Nuova, Dante describes the experience which fathered his adult self.  If we read these first sections of that work with the intensity of attention and minute care required, we will discover the nature of this seed, which grew into one of the greatest works of the Western Canon:

I
In My Book Of Memory, in the early part where there is little to be read, there comes a chapter with the rubric: Incipit vita nova (The new life begins).  It is my intention to copy into this little book the words I find written under that heading — if not all of them, at least the essence of their meaning.

II
Nine times already since my birth the heaven of light had circled back to almost the same point, when there appeared before my eyes the now glorious lady of my mind, who was called Beatrice even by those who did know what her name was.  She had been in this life long enough for the heaven of the fixed stars to be able to move a twelfth of a degree to the East in her time, that is, she appeared to me near the end of her ninth year.  She appeared dressed in the most patrician of colors, a subdued and decorous crimson, her robe bound round and adorned in a style suitable to her years.  At that very moment,1 and I speak the truth, the vital spirit, the one that dwells in the most secret chamber of the heart, began to tremble so violently that even the most minute veins of my body were strangely affected, and trembling, it spoke these words: Ecce deus fortior me, qui veniens dominabitur michi (Here is a god stronger than I who comes to rule over me.).  At that point, the animal spirit, the one abiding in the high chamber to which all the senses bring their perceptions was stricken with amazement and, speaking directly to the spirits of sight, said these words: Apparuit iam beatitudo vestra (Now your bliss has appeared.)  At that point, the natural spirit, the one dwelling in that part where our food is digested, began to weep, and weeping said these words: Heo miser, quia frequenter impeditus ero deinceps (Oh, wretched me, for I shall be disturbed often from now on.).  Love governed my soul, which became immediately devoted to him, and he reigned over me with such assurance and lordship, given him by the power of my imagination, that I could only dedicate myself to fulfilling his every pleasure.  Often he commanded me to go and look for this youngest of angels; so, during those early years, I often went in search of her, and I found her to be of such natural dignity and worthy of such admiration that the words of the poet Homer fitted her perfectly: "She seemed to be the daughter not of a mortal, but of a god."  And though her image, which remained constantly with me, was Love's assurance of holding me, it was of such a pure quality that it never allowed me to be ruled by Love without the faithful council of reason, in all those things where such advice might be profitable.   Since to dwell on my passions and actions when I was so young might seem like recounting fantasies, I shall put them aside and, omitting many things that could be copied from the text which is the source of my present words, I shall turn to those written in my memory under more important headings.

III
After so many days had passed that precisely nine years were ending since the appearance, just described, of this most gracious lady, it happened that on the last one of these days the miraculous lady appeared, dressed in purest white, between two ladies of noble bearing both older than she was; and passing along a certain street, she turned her eyes to where I was standing faint-hearted and, with that indescribable graciousness for which today she is rewarded in the eternal life, she greeted me so miraculously that I seemed at that moment to behold the entire range of possible bliss.  It was precisely the ninth hour of that day, three o'clock in the afternoon, when her sweet greeting came to me.  Since this was the first time her words had ever been directed to me, I because so ecstatic that, like a drunken man, I turned away from everyone and I sought the loneliness of my room, where I began thinking of this most gracious lady and, thinking of her, I fell into a sweet sleep, and a marvelous vision appeared to me.  I seemed to see a cloud the color of fire and, in that cloud, a lordly man, frightening to behold, yet he seemed also to be wondrously filled with joy.  He spoke and said many things, of which I understood only a few,: one was Ego dominus tuus (I am thy master.).  I seemed to see in his arms a sleeping figure, naked but lightly wrapped in a crimson cloth, looking intently at this figure, I recognized the lady of the greeting, the lady who earlier in the day had deigned to greet me.  On one hand he seemed to be holding something that was all in flames, and it seemed to be that he said these words: Vide cor tuum (Behold thy heart.).  And after some time had passed, he seemed to awaken the one who slept, and he forced her cunningly to eat of that burning object in his hand; she ate of it timidly.  A short time after this his happiness gave way to bitter weeping, and weeping he folded his arms around this lady, and together they seemed to ascend towards the heavens.  At that point my drowsy sleep could not bear the anguish that I felt; it was broken, and I awoke. 

Vita Nuova,
Translated by Mark Musa

1.  "At that very moment" — In quello punto dico veracemente, and later, repeated as In quello punto — at that point.  Note the exactitude by which Dante repeats this phrase coupled with the exactitude in which he describes the times of these events, time being not determined by a clock, but by celestial bodies, the motions, the very motivations of heaven.  This exactitude and the numbers and colors associated with it, namely the number nine, and the colors red and white, imprint his experience with the feeling of a cosmological imperative, in brief, Dante experiences his destiny as something heavenly.  A note: Readers may well pause here and wonder if all of this is just a literary invention, a fantasy (fabuloso).  Dante says: No, and I don't doubt him.  Once during a counseling session, a client kept recounting life traumas associated with the number 11.  Every eleven years a business failure, a divorce, an accident, a sickness struck him.  Finally I asked him, "What happened to you at the age of eleven?"  "Oh, I was riding my bicycle and got run over by a truck."  Thereafter, something inside of him, in his unconscious, kept track, and on the anniversary of that primal event, another trauma would invariably occur.  For good or ill, every intense event that we experience seems to become encoded into a survival program ("survival," not because it was harmful or healthful, but simply because we survived the event) and, faithful to that program, and absent any subsequent interference, this program continues to run its course with clockwork precision.  We think of causes and their effects as being closely associated in time, because that is the way the conscious mind notices them.  But they can also be widely separated on the temporal plane, and thus completely evade conscious notice, unless we have made some sort of record of them.  Dante speaks of this record as the Book of Memory, a text.  Language, his vernacular language, and the church language of Latin, these are his scripture, his transcribed soul, and because this record is so personal, so intense, it becomes the precise structural armature for his poetry, numbers and celestial time becoming for him underlying verities, and he repeats them with the uncanny precision of the zodiac's precessions.   

After these experiences, one as a nine-year old, and one as a teenager of eighteen, Dante begins to write poetry.  Between and after the two events, as he says, "by the power of my imagination," he continues to expand and conflate this diachronic experience as if the two, or the many, were one miraculous event, since now he has discovered that through the vehicle of poetry, the feeling can be replicated, infinitely enhanced, moved out of the line of sequential time, manipulated, compressed, expanded, and shared.  Thus poetry becomes for him the enactment of love, the test for truth and authenticity, and even the guiding light of reason.  The mighty tree that was his future artistic expression, and the forest of commentators that continues to expand around his work, all grow from this one mustard seed.  This seed is grammatical in its origins, and especially when we consider that aspect of grammar, which is not syntactical, or concerned with phonemes or definitions, but with entomology, the origin and propagation of families and generational lineages of words, how memes originate, how they propagate, and how they mutate.  Think now of all the references in his poem of scriptural, philosophical, mythic, and poetic texts, and how precisely he martials all of these linguistic streams to form the fountain of his own inspiration.  How Dante relates all this to the trope of eating as a metaphor for learning and spiritual transformation to the trope of the vow equated with the constancy/inconstancy cycle of the moon, will be dealt with more fully below, but for now we return to the idea of love, as the beginning and end of all authentic experience. In New Age jargon this is called the Law of Attraction, which asserts that things of a like emotional or imagistic frequency have an affinity for one another, that in fact this frequency of our inner state is the source of those seemingly outer perceptions which we call reality.  This is a very ancient idea, and one that Sir James Fraser catalogues with exuberant redundancy in the huge compendium of The Golden Bough.  Fraser calls it sympathetic magic, and consigns its practice to what his thinks of as the primitive stages of humanity's development.  But there are a few contemporary physicists who do not scoff at these notions, when they speak of quantum entanglement, or as Einstein called it: Spooky action at a distance.   The entire sequence of Beatrice's untangling of literal versus figurative language in scripture and in Plato's Timaeus, turns on line 51: però che, come dice, par che senta.  It's the kind of line that gives translators fits, because they too easily fall into the trap of mistaking one logical type for another, namely confusing how something is said to how something is perceived.  Whatever truth is it is not a thing, any more than the word water is in substance like that substance which chemists calls H2O.  Perhaps this is easier to understand in a different medium for those of us too mesmerized by words.  A picture of a landscape with trees is a statement in paint about a statement about our perception about which we make a statement in words when we say: This is a picture of a landscape with  trees.  None of these statements are unconditionally true, but they are provisionally operational in terms of our conditioned thoughts and behavior.  Beatrice's logic is not so much the logic of temporal cause and effect, but the logic of atemporal affinities derived by comparing differences from different levels of signification, and there is enough in our most current views of biology, physics, and semiotics to justify this supposition.  From this point, we might better be able to see that Dante's poetic subtilty is constantly emerging from under this surface of scholastic argument in a much more prophetic fashion.  These levels of description are each different types of signification hinting at either more particular or more inclusive statements of what Dante would call Intellect, and what Bateson called Mind.  All of the Inferno, all of the Purgatorio are, as it were, a sort of archeological gardening through various misinterpretations of the coding for different levels of a the more particular or more inclusive hierarchies.  Throughout these first two canticles, Dante the poet shows Dante the protagonist digging and scraping away these misinterpretations to uncover more inclusive and more organic origins.  The outcome of this process is the revelation of the Edenic forest concluding the Purgatorio, wherein the protagonist finds himself again as a sort of embryo entirely innocent of anything that distorted his previous development which had led him to the state of confusion in the in the first Canto of Inferno's savage wood.  At this point, he and we have returned to the beginning, but with a difference.  What is really wrong about the misinterpretation that Plato's message which on its surface asserts that the soul returns to the star of its origin, is that if this is so, than the temporal world of earthly life does not make any difference, it was all a chimera, with no will, no choice, no morality, no learning, no suffering, no joy, no hatred, not even any love.  All that experience was simply an open and closed set of parenthesis called birth and death, but containing between them no message at all, not even a message definable as zero.  This of course to Dante is a monstrous heresy, temporal life does make a difference, and what that difference is is what the entire Commedia is meant to express.  That entirety of the message of the poem cannot of course be contained in any part of the poem.  Our question as readers, as are Dante's questions as an aspirant, and also his question as a poet is always something like: Where do I go from here?  What we find in these first canti of the Paradiso is the neophyte soul beginning to develop that New Life which was promised by Love at the very inception of his consciousness.  All other experiences of his childhood were lost to memory, and not encoded in Memory's "text."   Thus the aspirant whom we find in these early canti of the Paradiso is still. as stated, a neophyte, and in this condition of not just innocence but utter naivite, he turns to Beatrice in his heavenly consternations as he had before turned to Virgil in his earthy and infernal traumas.  But we must remember here, that just as Dante, the aspirant, at some point outgrew the need for Virgil, we can anticipate that at some point he will also outgrow his dependence on Beatrice.  Incredible as this seems, it is not Beatrice per se who will ultimately free him, it is the spirit of Love, which is, like himself — because it is his Self, a male figure, to be represented by ... well that's getting way too far ahead of ourselves.  Here we have enough to do to be in the present tense of the poem, and to immerse ourselves on what is happening in the Commedia's here and now.  To do otherwise is to acquire a false sense of meaning and to use that falsity to murder any authenticity that might come from having a true sense of what we are reading as we are reading it.  We would only have a pseudo knowledge, unvalidated by experience.

Conflated with this this original validation, this most fruitful seed of development for authentic experience, there is also the substance and transformation of experience, which is equated in the first six lines as food, and specifically in the processes of the positions of eater and eaten, which the first six lines of this canto present as follows.  A person starving between two equally desirable and equally accessible types of food — the position of the eater's relationship to the eaten; a lamb between two wolves — the position of the to be eaten to the potential eaters — and a hound between two does — a return to the position of the eater between two possibilities of that which is to be eaten.  This is a cycle, a going out and a returning, but not quite to the same point.  This is not quite a closed circle.  But mirroring the geography of the first two canticles of the poem, we find here, in a sort of fractal of the whole, a spiral, as it begins to open its coil at the widening end.  Although all the tropes illustrate a paralysis of the will, a double bind that leads to the termination of the cycle itself, i.e., starvation and death, or to put it in a more theological or philosophical way, the murder of motivation by indecisiveness and doubt, there is in this cycle both a degradation and the beginnings of a regeneration.  The degradation is from human to animal, human being to wolf (remember the wolf from the first canto of Inferno), and the hint of regeneration as wolf evolves to hound — a regeneration also present in Inferno's first canto, where the greyhound drives the she-wolf back to Hell.  This last trope is an exemplar for the beginning of the taming of the appetites, as a hound is the tamed wolf, but still essentially a predator, and here, frozen by its own animal appetites when confronted by a double-bind situation.  (For an exposition of the nature of the double-bind see: Gregory Bateson: Mind and Nature a Necessary Unity1, and his theory of coding mistakes due to confusion between levels of what he calls logical hierarchies, and what Dante in this canto calls the literal and the metaphoric.)  But why the moon, why food? and what does all this have to do with grammar and constancy, will, and vows?  Some further elucidation is available by referencing another work by Dante, the Convivio, or The Banquet, in which he makes an extensive exposition of knowledge and learning as a type of metaphorical eating, the learner being the eater, and the knowledge, as delivered through the medium of language, as the food.  Why?  Because just as material food is 
necessary to sustain a material temporal body, knowledge or learning, the ability to assimilate, change, and create, is necessary to sustain the immaterial immortal form.  One should note here that the immaterial does not mean without form, it means something like the potential to create and assume forms.  Two quotes from Convivio are pertinent here, the first showing the relationship between knowledge or learning and food, and the second showing the relationship between Grammar and the Moon.

As the Philosopher says at the beginning of the First Philosophy, all men by nature desire to know.  The reason for this can be and is that each thing, impelled by a force provided by its own nature, inclines towards its own perfection.  Since knowledge is the ultimate perfection of our soul, in which resides our ultimate happiness, we are all therefore by nature subject to a desire for it.  Many are, however, deprived of this most noble perfection by various causes within and outside of man which remove him from the habit of knowledge.  Within man there exist two kinds of defects which impede him, one pertaining to the body, the other to the soul.  That pertaining to the body occurs when its parts are not properly disposed, so that it can receive nothing, as is the case with the deaf, the dumb, and the like.  That pertaining to the soul occurs when malice overcomes it, so that it becomes the follower of vicious pleasures, by which it is so deceived that because of them it degrades the worth of all things.  Likewise outside of man two causes may be discerned, one of which subjects him to necessity, the other to indolence. The first consists of domestic and civic responsibilities, which properly engage the greater number of men, so that they are permitted no time for contemplation. The other is the handicap that derives from the place where a person is born and bred, which at times will not only lack a university but be far removed from the company of educated persons.

Two of these causes, namely the first from within and the first from outside, are not to be blamed but excused and are deserving of pardon; the other two, although one more than the other, deserve our censure and scorn.  Anyone therefore can plainly see upon careful reflection that there remain few who are capable of achieving the habit of knowledge desired by all, and that the handicapped who live forever starved of this food are almost too numerous to count.  Blessed are the few who sit at the table where the bread of the angels is eaten, and most unfortunate those who share the food of sheep!

Convivio, Book I, Chapter 1, Translation by Richard Lansing


I say that the heaven of the Moon resembles Grammar because it may be compared to it; for if the Moon is closely examined, two things will be seen peculiar to it which are not seen in the other stars: one is the shadow in it, which is nothing but the rarity of its substance in which the rays of the Sun cannot terminate and be reflected back as in its other parts; the other is the variation of its luminosity, which shines now on one side, now on the other, according as the Sun looks upon it. These two properties Grammar possesses; for because of its infinitude the rays of reason are not terminated, especially in the particular of words; and it shines now on this side, now on that, insofar as certain words, certain declensions, and certain constructions are now in use which formerly were not, and many were formerly in use which will yet be in use again, as Horace says at the beginning of his Poetics, when he says: “Many words shall be born which have long since fallen out of use.” 

Ibid. Book II, Chapter 13

These excerpts from Convivio make the affinities, as noted above, easy enough to discern, as is the logic.  That is, if we consider that the logic is the natural logic of metaphor, which even when it lies below the surface of a step by step exposition of causation, is seen, not as something sequential at all, but is in fact a technique that exposes simultaneities, which is to say, eternal, atemporal,  rather than relativistic, temporal truths.  And this is the point that Beatrice makes in this canto when she explains that the difference in what she is saying and how Piccarda presents is not a difference where one side invalidates the other.  The difference is that the two expressions are differently coded messages, both true, one in a specific, peculiar context, and one in a universal context.  This coding error of the aspirant Dante is precisely the source of the double-bind situation described in the first six lines of the canto.  Placed between the truth of the particular and the truth of the general, he sees them as contradictory, and his will is paralyzed.  Devoted to truth, as the necessary food of his soul, and the only means of moving from naivite to transcendence, he has, as Bateson describes the schizophrenic, been placed in a state of catalepsy, which if continued would lead to catatonia, which if continued would lead to death.  The interim internal state of such a schizophrenic would be the mad process by which hallucinations keep insisting upon actions which are contradictory, internally self-destructive, and externally criminal.  All of the characters in the Inferno suffer from this particular malady of not only me-first, but me only, and even the protracted punishment that they suffer does not awaken them from this frozen state, exemplified finally by the image of Lucifer himself, as a completely frozen, non-autonomous, mechanical parody of a living being.  None of this should come as a surprise or as some sort of fantastic (fabuloso) literary invention, if one has a bit of understanding of the nature of some hypnotic trances.  Milton Ericson, a master hypnotist, was able to put people into a state of catalepsy by merely interrupting the conditioned response of a handshake.  When a person has a conditioned response to the trigger of the extended hand, he codes a sequence of actions as one action, and if that sequence is interrupted, the physiology gets stuck.  Ericson could leave that hand floating in the air in a complete state of autonomous catalepsy.  This catalepsy would persist until Ericson himself "unstuck" his subject.  That hand would be floating involuntarily in space, and the subject's eyes would be staring at this entirely autonomous phenomenon, and Ericson would then say: "You'll be able to lower your hand when you resolve that inner conflict you've been having."   Since everyone has some inner conflict, Ericson did not need to know the specifics in order to loose the double-bind.  Because Ericson moved smoothly from the specific to the general, he showed that he did not make the coding error of conflating, confusing, or creating an equal oppositional quality between the two.  He understood that the two messages were related in a  logical hierarchy, the higher level entraining the lower, hence the instantaneity of the hypnotic trance.  I bring up this lengthy example, because we all have inner conflicts which renders the will and our actions catalytic, or even catatonic, and until we solve the coding issue, that catatonia will continue indefinitely.   This is just nature, and no will whatsoever is involved.  The cataleptic is just reacting like an eyelid blinking in the presence of a sand grain.  Lines 7 and 8 show that Dante understood this, no blame could be attached to his inaction, it was, as he says, simply necessary (ch'era necessario).  Now if we re-read this canto from line 106 — A questo punto (from this point)— on through to the aspirant's realization that Beatrice's truth has resolved his inner conflict (lines 115 through 132), we end at a new beginning, i.e. the uncovering of a deeper inner conflict.  Noting the variation of the motionless phrase In quello punto (At this point) quoted above from the Vita Nuova, we see that the phrase A questo punto, from this canto, serves a similar recursive purpose, but with a difference, and the difference is one of movement, of freedom, of a closed circle or circuit becoming an open-ended spiral, a conducting coil.  If Lucifer is frozen like ice, then Beatrice's truth is ever-changing yet in substance ever-the same.  In this, her truth is like water, which the text affirms with a series of water metaphors.  The aspirant says that this truth is rippling, like a stream, yet brings peace, as in Psalm 23's "he leadeth me beside the still waters.;" it floods him and it scalds him, but makes him more alive, and it increases the "depth" of his affection.  Readers can find for themselves this whole pattern of water metaphors appearing throughout the poem, but in this case, it is specifically enlightening to look at how water is used as a metaphor vis à vis the mutable nature of these canti dedicated to the sphere of the moon.

Now let's read how Dante uses his exemplars in this canto to poetically present these subtle and multivalent expressions.  We've already dealt above with the issue of the double-bind as a coding error which paralyzes the will because it fails to read the differences between logical types.  Right away the text shows us that Dante cannot speak, gives no verbal or auditory expression, but his face and breath are even clearer expressions of his doubts.  The fact that these two types of expression, auditory and visual, are different codings for the same thing is something that Beatrice easily reads, and this ability to distinguish — to use a McLuhan distinction — the media from the message runs throughout the canto.  She is mind-reading, but not from Dante's speech, and her skill surely is not magic.  Such mind-reading we have seen before in Virgil, so it should not puzzle us.  One could argue that the aspirant learns this method by example in the way he presents, at the conclusion of the canto, a visual reading of Beatrice's expression in response to his verbal query. 

Now we have the exemplar of Nebuchadnezzar in lines 13 - 15, with Dante equated with Nebuchadnezzar and Beatrice with Daniel.  The story in question is this: Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, dreams of a statue with a head of gold, arms of silver, thighs of brass, legs of iron, feet of iron and clay.  Just as Freud centuries later saw how the dream operations of condensation, displacement and Witz present in visual simultaneities, which subsequently needed to be unraveled in sequential, verbal interpretations.  Likewise Daniel interpreted this dream as an historical, i.e., sequential appearance of various kingdoms or ages, correctly seeing the same message in two very different modalities of expression.  Here Beatrice shows a like facility in correcting Dante's paralyzing confusion.  Another message is also presented, and that is Nebuchadnezzar's proposed cruelty (fello), namely, to kill all the wise men in his kingdom for their failure to interpret the dream.  The adjective modifying "fello" is inguistamente (unjustly).  For justice to occur, its scales must balance, another presentation of the same but different, just as crime is different from punishment although the pain of both is the same.  All injustices are by their nature cruel, in so far as they disrupt the peace necessary to achieve the bliss of contemplation, or civil tranquility, or aesthetic pleasure.  If we've already read the first two canticles of the poem, we are well aware of how Dante proposes to set things right in terms of punishment to rectify the imbalances of transgression.  But here, Beatrice rights transgression through education, through the  presentation of knowledge, a very important distinction, and the distinction that Dante himself makes in the Convivio.  We do not have to balance a weight of led with led, we can also balance it with gold.  To be symmetrical, balance need not involve redundancy of substance, as long as it involves redundancy of essence.  Finally, the name Nebuchadnezzar evokes another association, not mentioned here, but surely tangentially pertinent.  Namely, the king went mad, and collapsing from human to animal in the condition of boanthropy, he "was driven from men and did eat grass as oxen."  Now isn't this the regressive cycle that we find in the first 6 lines of this canto, and doesn't it also recall that line in the Convivio wherein the ignorant are consigned to eat the food of sheep?  Here sheep, as any person raised in a Judeo-Christian culture realizes, has, in addition to the negative connotation give here and in the Convivio, the positive one which postulates the Lord as caretaker and the flock as obedient worshipers.  This then becomes a code with different meanings, as distinct from the codes we have been reading wherein different codes have the same meaning. 

Now we have the exemplar Beatrice uses to resolve the aspirant's doubts concerning the hierarchies of heaven.  In a sense this is a reiteration of that which has also been answered in the same but different way in the previous canto, when Piccarda compares those in Paradise as particles dissolved in the sea or solute of God's love.  Here, Beatrice makes a further distinction, wherein she says that for the sake of human understanding (a literal reading) distinctions such as high and low, less and more, better and worse are made, but in a metaphorical reading, these qualitative distinctions are only relative truths, not general or universal ones, only particulars and not universals.  We may be compelled by nature and the nature of languages, that is perceptions, be they auditory, visual, or sensate, but through our intellect we can read these differences as the particular species of a general class.  Her examples are drawn from the hierarchies of angels, that is, Seraphim, from the Old Testament of Hebrew souls, Moses and Samuel, any John, either the Baptist or the disciple, as transitional figures, and finally a Christian figure, Mary (whose name means "sea").  All of this is related to grammar, as sort of a primer on how to read, and Beatrice continue with her exposition of how scripture delivers its multitudes of messages all pointing to the same truths.  

Now we come to the Timaeus reading, which has already been dealt with above, and as a preview as to how we are to read the spheres of the stars which will be presented as we continue reading the Paradiso, Beatrice educates us in the correct interpretation of these spheres, which are different in expression, but the same in their relationship to that transcendent entirety, which Dante calls God.

Now we have the exemplar of Lawrence and Mucius, exemplars of martyrdom set as counter examples of absolute will (the sacred vow), not subject to even the most extreme conditions, versus relative will, the situation of Piccarda and Constance whose will turned out to be conditioned by the violence of others.  I think it is significant that both Lawrence and Mucius were tested by fire, and proved in a way that their will was more fiery, whereas Piccarda and Constance are associated with mutable water and the mutable moon.  

Now we have the exemplar of Alcmaeon who committed matricide in order to fulfill his obligation of paternal piety.  Beatrice then tells Dante to reflect (a moony kind of action of the memory) on how violence destroys any kind of piety, and cannot be excused or should we say harmonized with the whole, until it is purged.  Her answer is very like Arendt's supposition of the necessity of forgetfulness as a necessity in the preservation of justice, that word forget, standing in as synonym for the word forgive, or we might, going a step further, say the operations of grace and salvation.  If we had not realized it before, we now know, in our newly recovered naivite, that we are in Paradise, not in hell, nor in purgatory, with their systems of retributive justice.  Here Love is the balancing factor, and to learn is not to enter some Blakean dark cloud of experience, but to expand in our knowledge of forgiveness, of grace, of affinity, and of affection.  Recall all those angelic injunctions to "Fear not," because here, even in the presence of awesome, irresistible power, that power is on our side, that power teaches us how to love and be loved.

1. A great deal of what I have said in these notes about logical typing or logical hierarchies, encoding, and double-binds has been derived from the work of Gregory Bateson, mostly as presented in his book, Mind and Nature: A Necessary Unity.  That work is difficult to summarize succinctly because of the very nature of what we call summarizations or definitions or explanations, these being what Bateson calls metacommunications, which he illustrates in a series of examples, one of which is the so-called Cretan paradox, which is: "Epimenides, a Cretan, says: "Cretans always lie." "  The premise, Cretans always lie, is negated by the context of the premise, that Epimenides, the person making the assertion, is a Cretan.  Logically, if the context is true, then the statement must be false, and if the statement is true, then the context must be false.  The quotation marks represent different logical types, and what you are reading now represents a statement about those types, made as a metacommunication at the next higher level of logical types.  If fed into a computer, this paradox, as Bateson points out that Norbert Wiener pointed out, the computer would answer Yes ... No ... Yes ... No ... Yes ... No ... until the system broke down.  This is the nature of a double-bind, and this is what Dante is illustrating at the beginning of the canto, using food, just as did Pavlov with dogs in his experiments with operant conditioning.  Those experiments proceeded until the dog could not tell the difference between messages (stimuli), which brought a reward, and messages, which brought punishment or no reward.  The dogs so conditioned went mad, biting, refusing all food, or even becoming comatose.  Bateson says that "In all such cases, the step from one logical type to the next higher is a step from information about an event to information about a class of events or from considering the class to considering the class of classes."  The fact that the computer breaks down, the dogs go mad, or in Dante's example, the man starves, the sheep gets eaten, and the hounds go cataleptic, shows that although information is not a physical thing in the same way a perceiving organism is a physical thing, nevertheless an organism's failure to distinguish the encoding of logical types of information has physical consequences such as paralysis, madness, or death.  Classes of failure to correctly read the logical typing of a communication might be: failure to distinguish the literal from the metaphorical/allegorical, failure to  read a play fight from a real fight, a statement meant to be humorous from a statement meant to be serious, failure to see the double nature of a pun, failure to read irony, and so forth.  Dante's poetry exhibits all these types of metacommunication and many more, and it shows that he is able to read their different types of codings so deftly, that in the context we might call poem/reader, the reader can become enlightened about the nature of many logical types of information and thus learn how to read their codes.  We might interpret from this that poetry, and art in general, much like dreams, are types of play, whose actions have no particular or even useful immediate physical consequences, in the way that eating or sexual congress do, but which can teach us how to organize whole classes of our physical actions.  And this is a type of experience which is crucial to our sanity and even to our survival.

1  Between two viands, equally removed
2  And tempting, a free man would die of hunger
3  Ere either he could bring unto his teeth.

1  Intra due cibi, distanti e moventi
2  d'un modo, prima si morria di fame,
3  che liber' omo l'un recasse ai denti;

4  So would a lamb between the ravenings
5  Of two fierce wolves stand fearing both alike;
6  And so would stand a dog between two does.

4  sì si starebbe un agno intra due brame
5  di fieri lupi, igualmente temendo;
6  sì si starebbe un cane intra due dame:

7  Hence, if I held my peace, myself I blame not,
8  Impelled in equal measure by my doubts,
9  Since it must be so, nor do I commend.

7  per che, s'i' mi tacea, me non riprendo,
8  da li miei dubbi d'un modo sospinto,
9  poi ch'era necessario, né commendo.

10  I held my peace; but my desire was painted
11  Upon my face, and questioning with that
12  More fervent far than by articulate speech.

10  Io mi tacea, ma 'l mio disir dipinto
11 m'era nel viso, e 'l dimandar con ello,
12 più caldo assai che per parlar distinto.

13  Beatrice did as Daniel had done
14  Relieving Nebuchadnezzar from the wrath
15  Which rendered him unjustly merciless,

13  Fé sì Beatrice qual fé Danïello,
14  Nabuccodonosor levando d'ira,
15  che l'avea fatto ingiustamente fello;

16  And said: "Well see I how attracteth thee
17  One and the other wish, so that thy care
18  Binds itself so that forth it does not breathe.

16  e disse: “Io veggio ben come ti tira
17  uno e altro disio, sì che tua cura
18  sé stessa lega sì che fuor non spira.

19  Thou arguest, if good will be permanent,
20  The violence of others, for what reason
21  Doth it decrease the measure of my merit?

19  Tu argomenti: 'Se 'l buon voler dura,
20  la vïolenza altrui per qual ragione
21  di meritar mi scema la misura?'

22  Again for doubting furnish thee occasion
23  Souls seeming to return unto the stars,
24  According to the sentiment of Plato.

22  Ancor di dubitar ti dà cagione
23  parer tornarsi l'anime a le stelle,
24  secondo la sentenza di Platone.

25  These are the questions which upon thy wish
26  Are thrusting equally; and therefore first
27  Will I treat that which hath the most of gall.

25  Queste son le question che nel tuo velle
26  pontano igualmente; e però pria
27  tratterò quella che più ha di felle.

28  He of the Seraphim most absorbed in God,
29  Moses, and Samuel, and whichever John
30  Thou mayst select, I say, and even Mary,

28  D'i Serafin colui che più s'india,
29  Moïsè, Samuel, e quel Giovanni
30  che prender vuoli, io dico, non Maria,

31  Have not in any other heaven their seats,
32  Than have those spirits that just appeared to thee,
33  Nor of existence more or fewer years;

31  non hanno in altro cielo i loro scanni
32  che questi spirti che mo t'appariro,
33  né hanno a l'esser lor più o meno anni;

34  But all make beautiful the primal circle,
35  And have sweet life in different degrees,
36  By feeling more or less the eternal breath.

34  ma tutti fanno bello il primo giro,
35  e differentemente han dolce vita
36  per sentir più e men l'etterno spiro.

37  They showed themselves here, not because allotted
38  This sphere has been to them, but to give sign
39  Of the celestial which is least exalted.

37  Qui si mostraro, non perché sortita
38  sia questa spera lor, ma per far segno
39  de la celestïal c'ha men salita.

40  To speak thus is adapted to your mind,
41  Since only through the sense it apprehendeth
42  What then it worthy makes of intellect.

40  Così parlar conviensi al vostro ingegno,
41  però che solo da sensato apprende
43  ciò che fa poscia d'intelletto degno.

43  On this account the Scripture condescends
44  Unto your faculties, and feet and hands
45  To God attributes, and means something else;

44  Per questo la Scrittura condescende
45  a vostra facultate, e piedi e mano
46  attribuisce a Dio e altro intende;

46  And Holy Church under an aspect human
47  Gabriel and Michael represent to you,
48  And him who made Tobias whole again.

46  e Santa Chiesa con aspetto umano
47  Gabrïel e Michel vi rappresenta,
48  e l'altro che Tobia rifece sano.

49  That which Timaeus argues of the soul
50  Doth not resemble that which here is seen,
51  Because it seems that as he speaks he thinks.

49  Quel che Timeo de l'anime argomenta
50  non è simile a ciò che qui si vede,
51  però che, come dice, par che senta.

52  He says the soul unto its star returns,
53  Believing it to have been severed thence
54  Whenever nature gave it as a form.

52  Dice che l'alma a la sua stella riede,
53  credendo quella quindi esser decisa
54  quando natura per forma la diede;

55  Perhaps his doctrine is of other guise
56  Than the words sound, and possibly may be
57  With meaning that is not to be derided.

52  Dice che l'alma a la sua stella riede,
53  credendo quella quindi esser decisa
54  quando natura per forma la diede;

58  If he doth mean that to these wheels return
59  The honour of their influence and the blame,
60  Perhaps his bow doth hit upon some truth.

58  S'elli intende tornare a queste ruote
59  l'onor de la influenza e 'l biasmo, forse
60  in alcun vero suo arco percuote.

61  This principle ill understood once warped
62  The whole world nearly, till it went astray
63  Invoking Jove and Mercury and Mars.

61  Questo principio, male inteso, torse
62  già tutto il mondo quasi, sì che Giove,
63  Mercurio e Marte a nominar trascorse.

64  The other doubt which doth disquiet thee
65  Less venom has, for its malevolence
66  Could never lead thee otherwhere from me.

64  L'altra dubitazion che ti commove
65  ha men velen, però che sua malizia
66  non ti poria menar da me altrove.

67  That as unjust our justice should appear
68  In eyes of mortals, is an argument
69  Of faith, and not of sin heretical.

67  Parere ingiusta la nostra giustizia
68  ne li occhi d'i mortali, è argomento
69  di fede e non d'eretica nequizia.

70  But still, that your perception may be able
71  To thoroughly penetrate this verity,
72  As thou desirest, I will satisfy thee.

70  Ma perché puote vostro accorgimento
71  ben penetrare a questa veritate,
72  come disiri, ti farò contento.

73  If it be violence when he who suffers
74  Co-operates not with him who uses force,
75  These souls were not on that account excused;

73  Se vïolenza è quando quel che pate
74  nïente conferisce a quel che sforza,
75  non fuor quest' alme per essa scusate:

76  For will is never quenched unless it will,
77  But operates as nature doth in fire
78  If violence a thousand times distort it.

76  ché volontà, se non vuol, non s'ammorza,
77  ma fa come natura face in foco,
78  se mille volte vïolenza il torza.

79  Hence, if it yieldeth more or less, it seconds
80  The force; and these have done so, having power
81  Of turning back unto the holy place.

79  Per che, s'ella si piega assai o poco,
80  segue la forza; e così queste fero
81  possendo rifuggir nel santo loco.

82  If their will had been perfect, like to that
83  Which Lawrence fast upon his gridiron held,
84  And Mutius made severe to his own hand,

82  Se fosse stato lor volere intero,
83  come tenne Lorenzo in su la grada,
84  e fece Muzio a la sua man severo,

85  It would have urged them back along the road
86  Whence they were dragged, as soon as they were free;
87  But such a solid will is all too rare.

85  così l'avria ripinte per la strada
86  ond' eran tratte, come fuoro sciolte;
87  ma così salda voglia è troppo rada.

88  And by these words, if thou hast gathered them
89  As thou shouldst do, the argument is refuted
90  That would have still annoyed thee many times.

88  E per queste parole, se ricolte
89  l'hai come dei, è l'argomento casso
90  che t'avria fatto noia ancor più volte.

91  But now another passage runs across
92  Before thine eyes, and such that by thyself
93  Thou couldst not thread it ere thou wouldst be weary.

91  Ma or ti s'attraversa un altro passo
92  dinanzi a li occhi, tal che per te stesso
93  non usciresti: pria saresti lasso.

94  I have for certain put into thy mind
95  That soul beatified could never lie,
96  For it is near the primal Truth,

94  Io t'ho per certo ne la mente messo
95  ch'alma beata non poria mentire,
96  però ch'è sempre al primo vero appresso;

97  And then thou from Piccarda might'st have heard
98  Costanza kept affection for the veil,
99  So that she seemeth here to contradict me.

97  e poi potesti da Piccarda udire
98  che l'affezion del vel Costanza tenne;
99  sì ch'ella par qui meco contradire.

100  Many times, brother, has it come to pass,
101  That, to escape from peril, with reluctance
102  That has been done it was not right to do,

100  Molte fïate già, frate, addivenne
101  che, per fuggir periglio, contra grato
102  si fé di quel che far non si convenne;

103  E'en as Alcmaeon (who, being by his father
104  Thereto entreated, his own mother slew)
105  Not to lose pity pitiless became.

103  come Almeone, che, di ciò pregato
104  dal padre suo, la propria madre spense,
105  per non perder pietà si fé spietato.

106  At this point I desire thee to remember
107  That force with will commingles, and they cause
108  That the offences cannot be excused.

106  A questo punto voglio che tu pense
107  che la forza al voler si mischia, e fanno
108  sì che scusar non si posson l'offense.

109  Will absolute consenteth not to evil;
110  But in so far consenteth as it fears,
111  If it refrain, to fall into more harm.

109  Voglia assoluta non consente al danno;
110  ma consentevi in tanto in quanto teme,
111  se si ritrae, cadere in più affanno.

112  Hence when Piccarda uses this expression,
113  She meaneth the will absolute, and I
114  The other, so that both of us speak truth."

112  Però, quando Piccarda quello spreme,
113  de la voglia assoluta intende, e io
114  de l'altra; sì che ver diciamo insieme.”

115  Such was the flowing of the holy river
116  That issued from the fount whence springs all truth;
117  This put to rest my wishes one and all.

115  Cotal fu l'ondeggiar del santo rio
116  ch'uscì del fonte ond' ogne ver deriva;
117  tal puose in pace uno e altro disio.

118  "O love of the first lover, O divine,"
119  Said I forthwith, "whose speech inundates me
120  And warms me so, it more and more revives me,

118  “O amanza del primo amante, o diva,”
119  diss' io appresso, “il cui parlar m'inonda
120  e scalda sì, che più e più m'avviva,

121  My own affection is not so profound
122  As to suffice in rendering grace for grace;
123  Let Him, who sees and can, thereto respond.

121  non è l'affezion mia tanto profonda,
122  che basti a render voi grazia per grazia;
123  ma quei che vede e puote a ciò risponda.

124  Well I perceive that never sated is
125  Our intellect unless the Truth illume it,
126  Beyond which nothing true expands itself.

124  Io veggio ben che già mai non si sazia
125  nostro intelletto, se 'l ver non lo illustra
126  di fuor dal qual nessun vero si spazia.

127  It rests therein, as wild beast in his lair,
128  When it attains it; and it can attain it;
129  If not, then each desire would frustrate be.

127  Posasi in esso, come fera in lustra,
128  tosto che giunto l'ha; e giugner puollo:
129  se non, ciascun disio sarebbe frustra.

130  Therefore springs up, in fashion of a shoot,
131  Doubt at the foot of truth; and this is nature,
132  Which to the top from height to height impels us.

130  Nasce per quello, a guisa di rampollo,
131  a piè del vero il dubbio; ed è natura
132  ch'al sommo pinge noi di collo in collo.

133  This doth invite me, this assurance give me
134  With reverence, Lady, to inquire of you
135  Another truth, which is obscure to me.

133  Questo m'invita, questo m'assicura
134  con reverenza, donna, a dimandarvi
135  d'un'altra verità che m'è oscura.

136  I wish to know if man can satisfy you
137  For broken vows with other good deeds, so
138  That in your balance they will not be light."

136  Io vo' saper se l'uom può sodisfarvi
137  ai voti manchi sì con altri beni,
138  ch'a la vostra statera non sien parvi.”

139  Beatrice gazed upon me with her eyes
140  Full of the sparks of love, and so divine,
141  That, overcome my power, I turned my back

139  Beatrice mi guardò con li occhi pieni
140  di faville d'amor così divini,
141  che, vinta, mia virtute diè le reni,

142  And almost lost myself with eyes downcast.

142  e quasi mi perdei con li occhi chini.

Canto V
How does one radicalize one's response to this fantastic poem, and return its accumulated commentaries, which have worked tirelessly to tame it to sanity, to an inner landscape, an IN-sanity, wherein one has already crossed, in one's very mortal flesh, into an afterworld, where death's phantasmagoria becomes more real than anything seen in life, wherein the spirit of a woman who died young, and as a child, enthralled the life of another child, and bent the whole of history, with a passion exceeding the light of the physical sun, a light, like all photonic phenomena, without any mass, but with an organizing, revelatory power that raises the chaotic collisions of atoms into the magical forms of evolution, the magic of human beings, and of violent, exotic cultures, and the greater magic of poets and poetry, transformed by the megajoule wattage of a lover's glance?  It strikes me, that given the mad psychic geography of the Commedia, that it is only the power of Dante's organizing mind, his extreme ordering of his linguistic materials, which keeps us from declaring his entire enterprise as the product of a lunatic.  He has wrestled order out of chaos, but that chaos infuses every particular of his order.  Chaos is tamed, but only at its edges, at the membrane where theological order is sanctified by poetic form, beyond which lies that monstrous thing called God.  In the first twelve lines of this canto, wherein Dante self-references twice that this is a canto, from the place of the eyes to the soles of the feet is one hot mass of loving flame, of sight perfected, which infectiously, as one flame begets another, ignites the passion of the beloved with that of the lover.  Think of how pale our understanding of the intellect has become compared to this resplendent, eternal light, and think what manner of seduction we, as readers, are being coaxed to succumb to, as the words revolve around this question of the vow.  Like some sort of diabetic neuropathy the blaze of this sweetness comes bursting through the skin, and whether it is agony or sanctity, we can hardly tell, but it is a sort of irresistible prompting, and it defines the moment when the evolution of the universe and the self, turns, and with a will, which Dante defines as belonging only to angels and humans, chooses to observe its own processes, and to ask after its own geneses and destiny.  How did it come to pass that the cosmos had this potential to create a being not merely with the animal desire to live, but with the more-than animal desire: To know, and not only to know by some sort of philosophical or scientific probing, but to know through the passion of love.  To me, this seems to be what these questions of the vow are all about.  How is such a thing, in such a mutable universe, to be made constant?  Because, the weight of Beatrice's argument is just such an affirmation.  That the vow is that binding force which unites creature to Creator, which, if broken, negates that link of love that calls both into existence; the vow is a demonstration that the universe is not just a roiling, ongoing catastrophe, born with explosive violence, and heading for the gray, entropic soup of heat-death.  The vow marries the consent and largess of grace to the consenting, and all-generous sacrifice of the devoted.  It is clear that the conversation that the aspirant has had with Piccarda has created in him an anxiety that it might be too late for him, that he has already broken vows and that his intent to be faithful has been tried by the harsh conditions of a harsh society and found wanting.  He is still thinking of the vow as a sort of legal arrangement involving rules and retribution, whereas Piccarda has already said that her experience of grace is not diminished by any sense of punishment or lack, she is simply fulfilled — filled and full to the brim.  For some the fermented sunlight in a drop of wine is enough to intoxicate, while others are able to enjoy a goblet or a flask, but the wine and the intoxication is the same for all, only the capacity of the imbiber is less or more.  Or as the poem says, comparing the consuming of this experience of grace to the earthy act of digestion, some may sit at the communion table longer, because they have taken their nourishment from grosser food.  Perhaps the vow is another example of what the Buddhists call interdependent co-arising, wherein context, or in Dante's sense, God, and content, the devotee, are synchronized to produce something which could not conceivably exist without this bond of love which unites and harmonizes them.  If so, than Beatrice's words could be interpreted to mean that love as this binding force is that which may only grow stronger and still be called love, and that any contention is of necessity a weakening of that force — and, as she says and these "moon" canti illustrate, there are inevitable consequences to that weakening.  If this is  so, her observation in the first lines of the canto that the light of her mind is beginning to grow in Dante's mind is an indication that a vow is uniting them, a vow, as we see, where response through loving intuition precedes call, and answer precedes question.  In the vow, then, there arises the omnipotence of love as a third thing, a kind of grace that unites the two things that Beatrice enumerates as the thing agreed upon and the agreement itself.  This reversal is also reiterated in a temporal context in lines 91 and 92, where the quivering of the bow string is mentioned before the arrow striking its target, which indicates the speed of the transition from the realm of the Moon to that of Mercury, but it also shows something more than just a short lapse of time, it demonstrates the possibility of a time reversal.  If a vow negates time by always remaining at its original point of inspiration no matter how many temporal contingencies arise to thwart it, this trope shows us that in the realm of consciousness, or as Dante says elsewhere, through the power of imagination, love, which manifests the vow, is not a temporal phenomenon, and, being eternal, may move in any direction it wills with total freedom.

What follows this transition to Mercury is the remarkable trope of fish in a fishpond, a crystalline bubble containing luminous bubbles.  Such a humble metaphor!  And so easy to picture that any child could do it.  But fish are free to move in all directions through their element, whereas humans are surface dwellers, only able to move across a two-dimensional plane, and what a mysterious juxtaposition of the mutually observing.  Dante's aside to the reader emphasizes this mystery and reiterating that claim he makes in the Convivio, that all people hunger for knowledge, this image certainly keens our appetite to know.  Who are these spirits whose joy is so intense to share with another creature, unlike themselves, their overflow of love?  The water metaphor gives way to one of fire, and the peace of the serene pond is jarred by the rhyming of the words malizia (battlefield) and grazia (grace).  At this point, as all  the company of spirits overflows (like water) and overflares (like fire) with collective joy, these fish, who nest in light like birds, so dazzle Dante, that for a moment he is mute, and it is just here that he is prompted by Beatrice to speak! speak!  He does,  asking what we too most want to know.  Thus, like his own, our intellect is illumined.

One thing to notice here is that the distance between Dante the aspirant, who is the protagonist in the poem, and Dante the poet outside the poem, which was very great at the beginning of the Inferno, is beginning to narrow to the point of convergence.  Both will end in silence when the poem ceases to speak.  And yet, as readers, each of us, by now by the millions, are travelling from our own direction, each moving from a point of silent absorption towards the last spoken word of the poem, where, when the poet becomes quiet, we are endowed with his speech.  

1  "If in the heat of love I flame upon thee
2  Beyond the measure that on earth is seen,
3  So that the valour of thine eyes I vanquish,

1  “S'io ti fiammeggio nel caldo d'amore
2  di là dal modo che 'n terra si vede,
3  sì che del viso tuo vinco il valore,

4  Marvel thou not thereat; for this proceeds
5  From perfect sight, which as it apprehends
6  To the good apprehended moves its feet.

4  non ti maravigliar, ché ciò procede
5  da perfetto veder, che, come apprende,
6  così nel bene appreso move il piede.

7  Well I perceive how is already shining
8  Into thine intellect the eternal light,
9  That only seen enkindles always love;

7  Io veggio ben sì come già resplende
8  ne l'intelletto tuo l'etterna luce,
9  che, vista, sola e sempre amore accende;

10  And if some other thing your love seduce,
11  'Tis nothing but a vestige of the same,
12  Ill understood, which there is shining through.

10  e s'altra cosa vostro amor seduce,
11  non è se non di quella alcun vestigio,
12  mal conosciuto, che quivi traluce.

13  Thou fain wouldst know if with another service
14  For broken vow can such return be made
15  As to secure the soul from further claim."

13  Tu vuo' saper se con altro servigio,
14  per manco voto, si può render tanto
15  che l'anima sicuri di letigio.”

16  This Canto thus did Beatrice begin;
17  And, as a man who breaks not off his speech,
18  Continued thus her holy argument:

16  Sì cominciò Beatrice questo canto;
17  e sì com' uom che suo parlar non spezza,
18  continüò così 'l processo santo:

19  "The greatest gift that in his largess God
20  Creating made, and unto his own goodness
21  Nearest conformed, and that which he doth prize

19  “Lo maggior don che Dio per sua larghezza
20  fesse creando, e a la sua bontate
21  più conformato, e quel ch'e' più apprezza,

22  Most highly, is the freedom of the will,
23  Wherewith the creatures of intelligence
24  Both all and only were and are endowed.

22  fu de la volontà la libertate;
23  di che le creature intelligenti,
24  e tutte e sole, fuoro e son dotate.

25  Now wilt thou see, if thence thou reasonest,
26  The high worth of a vow, if it he made
27  So that when thou consentest God consents:

25  Or ti parrà, se tu quinci argomenti,
26  l'alto valor del voto, s'è sì fatto
27  che Dio consenta quando tu consenti;

28  For, closing between God and man the compact,
29  A sacrifice is of this treasure made,
30  Such as I say, and made by its own act.

28  ché, nel fermar tra Dio e l'omo il patto,
29  vittima fassi di questo tesoro,
30  tal quale io dico; e fassi col suo atto.

31  What can be rendered then as compensation?
32  Think'st thou to make good use of what thou'st offered,
33  With gains ill gotten thou wouldst do good deed.

31  Dunque che render puossi per ristoro?
32  Se credi bene usar quel c'hai offerto,
33 di maltolletto vuo' far buon lavoro.

34  Now art thou certain of the greater point;
35  But because Holy Church in this dispenses,
36  Which seems against the truth which I have shown thee,

34  Tu se' omai del maggior punto certo;
35  ma perché Santa Chiesa in ciò dispensa,
36  che par contra lo ver ch'i' t'ho scoverto,

37  Behoves thee still to sit awhile at table,
38  Because the solid food which thou hast taken
39  Requireth further aid for thy digestion.

37  convienti ancor sedere un poco a mensa,
38  però che 'l cibo rigido c'hai preso,
39  richiede ancora aiuto a tua dispensa.

40  Open thy mind to that which I reveal,
41  And fix it there within; for 'tis not knowledge,
42  The having heard without retaining it.

40  Apri la mente a quel ch'io ti paleso
41  e fermalvi entro; ché non fa scïenza,
42  sanza lo ritenere, avere inteso.

43  In the essence of this sacrifice two things
44  Convene together; and the one is that
45  Of which 'tis made, the other is the agreement.

43  Due cose si convegnono a l'essenza
44  di questo sacrificio: l'una è quella
45  di che si fa; l'altr' è la convenenza.

46  This last for evermore is cancelled not
47  Unless complied with, and concerning this
48  With such precision has above been spoken.

46  Quest' ultima già mai non si cancella
47  se non servata; e intorno di lei
48  sì preciso di sopra si favella:




49  Therefore it was enjoined upon the Hebrews
50  To offer still, though sometimes what was offered
51  Might be commuted, as thou ought'st to know.

49  però necessitato fu a li Ebrei
50  pur l'offerere, ancor ch'alcuna offerta
51  si permutasse, come saver dei.

52  The other, which is known to thee as matter,
53  May well indeed be such that one errs not
54  If it for other matter be exchanged.

52  L'altra, che per materia t'è aperta,
53  puote ben esser tal, che non si falla
54  se con altra materia si converta.

55  But let none shift the burden on his shoulder
56  At his arbitrament, without the turning
57  Both of the white and of the yellow key;

55  Ma non trasmuti carco a la sua spalla
56  per suo arbitrio alcun, sanza la volta
57  e de la chiave bianca e de la gialla;

58  And every permutation deem as foolish,
59  If in the substitute the thing relinquished,
60  As the four is in six, be not contained.

58  e ogne permutanza credi stolta,
59  se la cosa dimessa in la sorpresa
60  come 'l quattro nel sei non è raccolta.

61  Therefore whatever thing has so great weight
62  In value that it drags down every balance,
63  Cannot be satisfied with other spending.

61  Però qualunque cosa tanto pesa
62  per suo valor che tragga ogne bilancia,
63 sodisfar non si può con altra spesa.

64  Let mortals never take a vow in jest;
65   Be faithful and not blind in doing that,
66  As Jephthah was in his first offering,

64  Non prendan li mortali il voto a ciancia;
65  siate fedeli, e a ciò far non bieci,
66  come Ieptè a la sua prima mancia;

67  Whom more beseemed to say, 'I have done wrong,
68  Than to do worse by keeping; and as foolish
69  Thou the great leader of the Greeks wilt find,

67  cui più si convenia dicer 'Mal feci,'
68  che, servando, far peggio; e così stolto
69  ritrovar puoi il gran duca de' Greci,

70  Whence wept Iphigenia her fair face,
71  And made for her both wise and simple weep,
72  Who heard such kind of worship spoken of.'

70  onde pianse Efigènia il suo bel volto,
71  e fé pianger di sé i folli e i savi
72  ch'udir parlar di così fatto cólto.

73  Christians, be ye more serious in your movements;
74  Be ye not like a feather at each wind,
75  And think not every water washes you.

73  Siate, Cristiani, a muovervi più gravi:
74  non siate come penna ad ogne vento,
75  e non crediate ch'ogne acqua vi lavi.

76  Ye have the Old and the New Testament,
77  And the Pastor of the Church who guideth you
78  Let this suffice you unto your salvation.

76  Avete il novo e 'l vecchio Testamento,
 77  e 'l pastor de la Chiesa che vi guida;
78  questo vi basti a vostro salvamento.

79  If evil appetite cry aught else to you,
80  Be ye as men, and not as silly sheep,
81  So that the Jew among you may not mock you.

79  Se mala cupidigia altro vi grida,
80  uomini siate, e non pecore matte,
81  sì che 'l Giudeo di voi tra voi non rida!

82  Be ye not as the lamb that doth abandon
83  Its mother's milk, and frolicsome and simple
84  Combats at its own pleasure with itself."

82  Non fate com' agnel che lascia il latte
83  de la sua madre, e semplice e lascivo
84  seco medesmo a suo piacer combatte!”

85  Thus Beatrice to me even as I write it;
86  Then all desireful turned herself again
87  To that part where the world is most alive.

85  Così Beatrice a me com'ïo scrivo;
86  poi si rivolse tutta disïante
87  a quella parte ove 'l mondo è più vivo.

88  Her silence and her change of countenance
89  Silence imposed upon my eager mind,
90  That had already in advance new questions;

88  Lo suo tacere e 'l trasmutar sembiante
89  puoser silenzio al mio cupido ingegno,
90  che già nuove questioni avea davante;

91  And as an arrow that upon the mark
92  Strikes ere the bowstring quiet hath become,
93  So did we speed into the second realm.

91  e sì come saetta che nel segno
92  percuote pria che sia la corda queta,
93  così corremmo nel secondo regno.

94  My Lady there so joyful I beheld,
95  As into the brightness of that heaven she entered,
96  More luminous thereat the planet grew;

94  Quivi la donna mia vid' io sì lieta,
95  come nel lume di quel ciel si mise,
96  che più lucente se ne fé 'l pianeta.

97  And if the star itself was changed and smiled,
98  What became I, who by my nature am
99  Exceeding mutable in every guise!

97  E se la stella si cambiò e rise,
98  qual mi fec' io che pur da mia natura
99  trasmutabile son per tutte guise!

100  As, in a fish-pond which is pure and tranquil,
101  The fishes draw to that which from without
102  Comes in such fashion that their food they deem it;

100  Come 'n peschiera ch'è tranquilla e pura
101  traggonsi i pesci a ciò che vien di fori
102  per modo che lo stimin lor pastura,

103  So I beheld more than a thousand splendours
104  Drawing towards us, and in each was heard:
105  "Lo, this is she who shall increase our love."

103  sì vid' io ben più di mille splendori
104  trarsi ver' noi, e in ciascun s'udia:
105  “Ecco chi crescerà li nostri amori.”

106  And as each one was coming unto us,
107  Full of beatitude the shade was seen,
108  By the effulgence clear that issued from it.

106  E sì come ciascuno a noi venìa,
107  vedeasi l'ombra piena di letizia
108  nel folgór chiaro che di lei uscia.

109  Think, Reader, if what here is just beginning
110  No farther should proceed, how thou wouldst have
111  An agonizing need of knowing more;

109  Pensa, lettor, se quel che qui s'inizia
110  non procedesse, come tu avresti
111  di più savere angosciosa carizia;

112  And of thyself thou'lt see how I from these
113  Was in desire of hearing their conditions,
114  As they unto mine eyes were manifest.

112  e per te vederai come da questi
113  m'era in disio d'udir lor condizioni,
114  sì come a li occhi mi fur manifesti.

115  "O thou well-born, unto whom Grace concedes
116  To see the thrones of the eternal triumph,
117  Or ever yet the warfare be abandoned

115  “O bene nato a cui veder li troni
116  del trïunfo etternal concede grazia
117  prima che la milizia s'abbandoni,

118  With light that through the whole of heaven is spread
119  Kindled are we, and hence if thou desirest
120  To know of us, at thine own pleasure sate thee."

118  del lume che per tutto il ciel si spazia
119  noi semo accesi; e però, se disii
120  di noi chiarirti, a tuo piacer ti sazia.”

121  Thus by some one among those holy spirits
122  Was spoken, and by Beatrice: "Speak, speak
123  Securely, and believe them even as Gods."

121  Così da un di quelli spirti pii
122  detto mi fu; e da Beatrice: “Dì, dì
123  sicuramente, e credi come a dii.”

124  "Well I perceive how thou dost nest thyself
125  In thine own light, and drawest it from thine eyes,
126  Because they coruscate when thou dost smile,

124  “Io veggio ben sì come tu t'annidi
125  nel proprio lume, e che de li occhi il traggi,
126  perch' e' corusca sì come tu ridi;

127  But know not who thou art, nor why thou hast,
128  Spirit august, thy station in the sphere
129  That veils itself to men in alien rays."

127  ma non so chi tu se', né perché aggi,
128  anima degna, il grado de la spera
128  che si vela a' mortai con altrui raggi.”

130  This said I in direction of the light
131  Which first had spoken to me; whence it became
132  By far more lucent than it was before.

130  Questo diss' io diritto a la lumera
131  che pria m'avea parlato; ond' ella fessi
132  lucente più assai di quel ch'ell' era.

133  Even as the sun, that doth conceal himself
134  By too much light, when heat has worn away
135  The tempering influence of the vapours dense,

133  Sì come il sol che si cela elli stessi
134  per troppa luce, come 'l caldo ha róse
135  le temperanze d'i vapori spessi,

136  By greater rapture thus concealed itself
137  In its own radiance the figure saintly,
138  And thus close, close enfolded answered me

136  per più letizia sì mi si nascose
137  dentro al suo raggio la figura santa;
138  e così chiusa chiusa mi rispuose

139  In fashion as the following Canto sings.

139 nel modo che 'l seguente canto canta.

Canto VI
The heaven of Mercury may be compared to Dialectics because of two properties: for Mercury is the smallest star of heaven, because the magnitude of its diameter is not more than 232 miles, according to Alfraganus, who says it is 1/28th of the diameter of the earth, which is 6500 miles; the other property is that in its passage it is veiled by the rays of the sun more than any other star. These two properties are found in Dialectics, for Dialectics is less in substance than any other science, for it is entirely constituted by and contained within that text alone which is found in the Old Art and in the New; and its passage is veiled more than that of any science, in that it proceeds by a more sophistical and polemical mode of argument than any other.

Convivio, Book II, Chapter 13

I don't think it's wise for a reader to hold that Dante can be overestimated, which is not quite the same thing as being uncritical of whatever the text presents.  Dante has done his job, and more than done his job, and if the readers are to benefit from what cost Dante so much, they must allow the texts to enter into them and do their work.  What is that work?  It has historical elements, as it does here in Paradiso, Canto VI, but it is not history, perhaps it is more like a revelation of history's effects and even more crucially, history's potential to influence the present and the future.  Of course, too, the work has allegorical implications, but those implications are not historically fixed in the early 14th Century.  It certainly has moral implications, which seem to have been able to survive changes in customs and belief systems in a way that goes beyond Christian ethics as it had developed up to his time, because you don't have to be a Christian to understand the psychological efficacy of his continued moral guidance.  And finally, in its most stable and at the same time most adaptable form, it has an anagogic function, and that function seems to be its foundational core, its seedbed for new forms and new affects and effects.   And it does not seem to matter much if we decide to call that core mystical, spiritual, transformational, organicizational (to coin a word), or to use some Sanskrit word, or Buddhist terminology, or a coinage from quantum mechanics, the Jewish Kabbala, or some concept from aboriginal myth ... when we get down to this level of the work, if we go this far, it works like evolution, capable both of stabilizing and changing, of conserving, adapting, mutating, and/or harmonizing, while all the while remaining the same words in the mouth, the same words on the page, in whatever translation it gloms on to.  Because we know that these beautiful, profound, exciting 14th Century Tuscan Italian Dialect wonders quite audaciously beg to be translated, and to extend their rhizome into other linguistic ecosystems, while those translations also spawn readers and commentators, who have to scurry back to the originals to prove, disprove, clarify, or obfuscate their impressions.  I think of these things as a sort of way to mark time, when I'm trying to digest, or rather, be digested by, the next canto on my agenda.  It would be so easy to just take the literal level of the work, read the historical commentary on this history, put the whole thing into some kind of mental museum case, and just admire and wonder at it, as one might admire the fossil of a fantastic extinct animal, as a way to pass the time on a rainy afternoon, a way to garner a little culture, but not too much ... this would not be a critter you would want to run into on the way back to the car.  This canto on history and justice, looks so easy to confine in that case, but ... 

 Well, from the above, we already know that the whole of the Commedia is geometrical in the sense that in addition to its vertical aspect of narration — the journey of the aspirant through the times and places of the afterlife — there is always also this horizontal aspect of the poem, which is traditionally arranged thusly: 

Literal
Allegorical
Moral
Anagogic

These aspects cannot be separated as say notes on the staffs of music are visually separated on a printed page, but like the sounds generated by the musicians, they interweave, overlap, sometimes one of them soloing, sometimes the members of the group dialoging, sometimes all of them sounding in consort, either dissonantly or harmoniously.  All this is easy enough to grasp theoretically, but not always too easy to grasp as the horizontal elements play out through the vertical movement the narrative, and this is especially so when one element contradicts another or when one element undercuts or changes the meaning of another in the case of an ironic cast of one expression coloring an apparently sincere expression or in the case of one expression reversing another's  "meaning" in a cross-current.  One question that stands out for me is this: Is it possible that the spirits in Paradise can be victims of self-deception in a way that perpetuates their blessedness as the shades in Hell by their self-deception perpetuate their damnation?  Are the blessed confined to their sphere by an ideal of service to the greater good as the damned are confined to their sphere by an ideal peculiar to their own brand of selfishness?  And, here, I want to incorporate, at least tangentially one familiar Freudian idea, i.e., that of the ego, and one idea from magical traditions, i.e., that of the Egregore.  We are familiar with the ego as a sort of emergent property from a vast host of unconscious psychological and physiological processes, but we are less familiar with the Egregore-concept, which postulates that there is also a virtual identity analogous to the ego that emerges from some social or historical collectivity.  The Egregore emerges from ideals of a Nationality, or ethnicity, or even from such things as sports affiliation or company cultures.  Christianity as it arises in an historical context is an Egregore, and Dante, the historical figure, in his ego self, was embedded in this Egregore.  But was his poetic self likewise embedded?  Or did he find, through these texts, a way through to transcendence of both ego and Egregore.  Did he find a soul or spirit who operations remain in bliss in spite of the machinations which emerge as personality, evolutionary development, or historical imperatives?  When we begin to approach the text from the spheres of such questions, then the fosses, the ledges, and the heavens respectively of the Inferno, the Purgatorio, and the Paradiso begin to reveal their transcendent natures.  We have to leave whatever speculation we might have about how Dante, a personage of 14th Century Tuscany, believed or felt about these issues, because he too had a conscious and unconscious self, and his purposes could not be revealed by only his ego side, even if he were still around to ask.  What speaks now is the text, and to further refine this consideration, it is the text as it does its work in the conscious/unconscious self of each individual reader.  The text is the meeting ground of the mutual faith of poet and reader to create the poem.  The word faith has always been subject to spoilage by the actions of those who appropriate it for selfish ends, or for the Egregore of a religion,  and the word fealty denoted a concept that held the whole Medieval world, with its social hierarchies and extreme stratifications, into a semi-workable governance, but, that being said, we can't throw away all feelings of trust around what the text is doing inside of us and among us as we attempt to assimilate it, and also as we permit it to assimilate us.  Skepticism as to the importance, and I would say for me, sacredness, of the text is more than anything else a dodge to protect one's ignorance, to stay safely nestled in the down or thorns of one's own concepts about what words are and about what they can do vis a vis any cosmological questions concerning the self or Creation and creativity.  And, having said this, it is just as clear to me that I cannot summon this faith without recognizing that its tissue is absolutely riddled with the dark matter of cynicism, doubt, laziness, hopelessness, confusion, boredom, derision, randomness and the like, and that these elements cannot be separated from either the text or my reading of it.  One could say that these darker elements are the causes of the suffering we feel when confronting this disunity inside ourselves (Justinian in the text says in line 21: ogne contradizione e falsa e vera — each contradiction is false and true.).  But so are the lighter elements (And Justinian and the whole planet of Mercury/dialectic/logic is veiled by the Sun/Apollo/Poetic Inspiration), which tell us that Whitman was on to something when he declared: "Do I contradict myself, very well then, I contradict myself, (I am large, I contain multitudes)."  Any text that is going to mimic and therefore embody Creation and creativity has to express aspects of both faith and doubt, formation and destruction, in the operations of its elements.  And as I've proceeded in reading Dante, I am struck by how faithful his texts are in expressing these apparently conflicting and contrasting elements.  I don't believe that there is any bedrock of truth here, yet there does seem to be a process of truthiness, there does seem to be to be something which embraces the contradictions, something which I am going to call a kind of ether or solute of aesthetics, a kind of deep and abiding wonder at the immense beauty which is imbued in both the triumphs and tragedies of Creation, and is equally present, though not similarly expressed, in all three canticles of the Commedia.  Beatrice embodies it, and love expresses it, but the Nothing — in both its noun-ness as Nothingness, and its verb-ness as a process of erasure — contains it, this IT being what was, what is, and the potential for what is to be.  What separates the damned in the Inferno and the blessed in the Paradiso, and what is being revealed to the pilgrims in the Purgatorio, is an orientation towards this aesthetic.  In brief: Are the spirits experiencing themselves and their situation as beautiful or grotesque, as blessed or as blasted?  And if this aesthetical theological cosmology is the underlying, or in the schema above, anagogic fundamental of the text, how do readers catch the ghost in the machine which makes of the machine a living organism, a meaning-matter endowed with spirit?

From the Convivio we can ascertain this.

Dialectic/Logic is of less magnitude than the earth. 

Dialectic/logic is veiled by the brighter light of the sun.

Dialectic/logic is of less substance than any of the other sciences, being entirely textual.

Dialectic/logic promotes itself through that which is sophistical (fallacious?) and polemic (argumentative?).

Note that all of these definitions are seemingly detracting, and if that is so, than how can dialectic/logic by itself be a methodology for arriving at anything like a universal truth?  To use an irony to promote an irony, in a paraphrase of Polonius: By indirection we might still find direction out.  And in this canto, wherein there are as many as 40 historical figures mentioned, it may well seem contradictory to say that much of what is said here is ahistorical, in the sense that the text traverses the distance between historical acts and destiny's purposes, and reveals how often the one is negated by the other and vice versa.  Just so, it seems strange that the main protagonist of the canto is not its primary speaker, Justinian, but Romeo of Villeneuve, a  personage of low birth who, like the historical Dante, was an exile, i.e., the courtier, steward and chief minister of the Provençal Count, Raymond Berenger.  Romeo does not speak, does not appear, but he is the hidden composer of this canto's Contrapuntus.  He is the Dantean doppelganger, the composer who sings through the prosaic speaking voice of his amanuensis, Justinian, that (line 124) Diverse voci fanno dolci note (differing voices make sweet music).  The fact that Romeo, the initiator, shows up here, at the end of the canto, shows us that here we have to go back in order to go forward, which is logical nonsense in prose, but, in this case, the very logic of poetry.      

Remember how Beatrice shows that surface interpretations, as in Plato's Timaeus, might veil deeper verities, foreshadowing Justinian’s statement about contradictions inclusive of opposing positions, as if dialectic were true to its name, and always provocative of what Blake called a "cloven fiction," its logic always veiling an underlying illogic.  My intuition sees through this glass darkly, and what it sees is that the emergent surface effects of the ego/Egregore veil, distort, or altogether hide the deeper processes which give rise to them.  We are sinking in deep waters here, and the seeming historical, judicial themes of this canto may well be but the lightest surface tension, which, if we pause at any moment to consider, might well give way to an unsuspected depth, a depth which belies the surface narrative about Roman hegemony, pax Romana, and the establishment of a single monarch with a spiritual advisor as the preconditions for an harmonious civil society.  But things don't necessarily confine themselves to any level particular level of interpretation.  Starting anywhere, we can always postulate another level as a deeper level, some negation of any given surface argument may itself veil a deeper affirmation.  I believe that the dialectic/logic which the text utilizes here is precisely (or nebulously) this kind probing.

I want to deviate for a moment and add a commentary about Bateson's Mind and Nature: A Necessary Unity, because I learned from this book three things that helped me through the issues presented in this canto.  One: "Logic Is a Poor Model of Cause and Effect."  Two: "Language Commonly Stresses Only One Side of Any Interaction."  And three: "Stability and Change describe parts of our descriptions."  To get at why our usual didactic positions are so inherently limiting, we have to approach them from the double descriptions of poetry, its narrative and metaphoric, vertical and horizontal aspects, which is exactly what this canto and the entire Commedia does.  As we penetrate more deeply in the fourfold unity of poetry as listed above, it begins to dawn on us that there is no way to logically solve a contradiction or politically resolve opposing factions, and that the mortal psyche, split between conscious aspirations and unconscious desires, can never from the plane of mortality alone achieve peace.  The propositions which this canto embodies are poetic and are exemplified by Justinian's acceptance of the Agapetus revelation that, like Christ, we are comprised of but one nature of harmoniously melded aspects: human and divine.  As soon as that revelation is experienced and the whole being is saturated with this one harmonizing totality, then the laws that govern peace, as a thermostat governs temperature, or as immune systems govern the human body, are shown to be perpetually operational, and there is no need to use external violence to enforce them, nor are they subverted even by the existence of violence.  This canto, as does the entire Commedia, champions poetry over polemics and poetry over politics, and it is through the linguistic maneuvers of poetry, and not those of dialectic and logic, that we might come to that revelation of unity which the human/divine nature of Jesus embodied.  The model reading is that crucifixion and resurrection are a single act, or if one prefers, transgression and forgiveness are a single act.  These types of apparently conflicting experiences can only be seen as one in what is traditionally called the "fullness of time," (lines 55 - 57: Greek: Kairos, Latin: plenitudinem temporis), so that one can begin to comprehend the allegory of the Roman empire, or of any totalizing political system, with all of its history of violence and supression, as an instrument of the divine, this violence, in the very act of its bloody and unjust commission, summons forth the conditions which expose mortality as an insufficient instrument of peace and blessedness, until it is fused with eternity's perpetual resurrection and forgiveness.  The contradictions of sequential time can only be resolved from the metaposition of eternity.  Unless we realize this while reading Canto VI of the Paradiso, we can only read it as irony.  (And it doesn't matter if the conscious Dante knew this or not, because the poet's unconscious certainly did express this irony as one aspect of the text.  Just think for example of Justinian's use of the word "mirrare" (line 48), a rare word or perhaps a coinage meaning to embalm or preserve in myrrh.  How can this metaphor for his codex of laws comparing it to a corpse whose stink is masked by a the expensive application of this incense, be anything but ironic?)  From a strictly mortal/historical point of view, Justinian's claims that the history  of the Roman empire is one of peace, and the violent examples he gives as premises to prove his conclusion, are glaringly nonsensical.  And the refrain of You know, you know, you know that rings through the territory of his exposition are a reminder that his exemplars are anything but those of peace, but rather those of the most extreme forms of violence, rape, and rapine.  To see things otherwise is to follow the "normal" sequence of history, but that's not what Dante presents here, because he starts with peace and harmony, just as he started in Piccarda's speech by showing that the inconstant spirits in the Heaven of the Moon are afloat in the entire sea of bliss.   What follows here with Justinian and his ilk in the Heaven of Mercury are spirits afloat like fish in a pond.  Yes, the pond is smaller, but the condition of those in its solute is no different than those blissfully suspended in the currents of the ocean. (We know we are still in the domain of water-metaphors here because Justinian maps the progress of the Empire through rivers, their valleys, and the territories, which they drain.  The text ... and the empire ... goes on even to the limits of water, to the deserts, and the dry lightning with which the weather itself marks a fiery boundary to the habitable world.)  And this same beginning preceding the end continues with the metaphor of the arrow, first hitting the target, and then being released from the bowstring.  And again, we see this reversal of time in the image of Constantine reversing the natural movement of the sun and the empire from east to west to that of west to east, the east, where Justinian, as Caesar purified the law, and the west where Belisarius — and we must not forget that historically Justinian, far from rewarding his general and effigy for his own violent nature — repudiated the great warrior, stripped him of his possessions, had him blinded, and left him to die in political exile and penurious beggary.  It is worth noting as well that Agapetus came to Justinian only after Justinian had completed his reforms of the law, and that many of the heavenly sanctioned acts of the Roman republic and empire were carried out before Christ's birth and resurrection.  What the poetry is presenting here is the fullness of time as a kind of orb or sphere, rather than a sequential series of dot-like events on a line, and as has been pointed out, all of the canto sixes in the Commedia deal with the same issue of politics so that if we read backwards we see suspended in its sphere the contraction of the idea of the peace of the Roman Empire back to its most restricted and violent local conflicts, those of Dante's own time, of the Ghibellines and the Guelphs, both of which factions promoted violence as a method of establishing a lasting political harmony.  As the slogan of the nineteen sixties put it: Fighting for peace is like fucking for chastity, and with the rape bookends of the seven kings in this canto, Justinian is saying the same thing.  As long as we hold to the cloven fiction that time and history are a series of sequentially arranged causes and effects, we can never see the sphere of eternal time as a sort of solute in which all actions are suspended in a kind of hidden fluid of affinities, wherein what we view as cause and what we view as effects are only parts of a whole, neither of which factional fragments are in any sense determining, as it is this organizing power of Time in its sort of I Ching-like totality which from moment to moment is expressed either as a moment of peace or of violence, not because Time has evolved, but because we see its actions either from the unified harmony of human/divine or from the fragmented position of our human, historical, evolutionary and mortal condition alone.  What counts, as we might express it in a sort of Bhagavad Gita-like allusion, is our virtue, our vertú, or our power.  We cannot control outcomes, the solute of the Times does that.  And what is the chief virtue?  It is, as Churhill said "courage" because it insures all the others.  We only choose our attitude towards the actions that our Times demand of us ... that is to say, our courage in facing the moment and in fulfilling our temporal destinies so that we might enjoy that courage as our eternal reward. 

1  "After that Constantine the eagle turned
2  Against the course of heaven, which it had followed
3  Behind the ancient who Lavinia took,

1  “Poscia che Costantin l'aquila volse
2  contr' al corso del ciel, ch'ella seguio
3  dietro a l'antico che Lavina tolse,

4  Two hundred years and more the bird of God
5  In the extreme of Europe held itself,
6  Near to the mountains whence it issued first;

4  cento e cent' anni e più l'uccel di Dio
5  ne lo stremo d'Europa si ritenne,
6  vicino a' monti de' quai prima uscìo;

7  And under shadow of the sacred plumes
8  It governed there the world from hand to hand,
9  And, changing thus, upon mine own alighted.

7  e sotto l'ombra de le sacre penne
8  governò 'l mondo lì di mano in mano,
9  e, sì cangiando, in su la mia pervenne.

10  Caesar I was, and am Justinian,
11  Who, by the will of primal Love I feel,
12  Took from the laws the useless and redundant;

10  Cesare fui e son Iustinïano,
11  che, per voler del primo amor ch'i' sento,
12  d'entro le leggi trassi il troppo e 'l vano.

13  And ere unto the work I was attent,
14  One nature to exist in Christ, not more,
15  Believed, and with such faith was I contented.

13  E prima ch'io a l'ovra fossi attento,
14  una natura in Cristo esser, non piùe,
15  credea, e di tal fede era contento;

16  But blessed Agapetus, he who was
17  The supreme pastor, to the faith sincere
18  Pointed me out the way by words of his.

16  ma 'l benedetto Agapito, che fue
17  sommo pastore, a la fede sincera
18  mi dirizzò con le parole sue.

19  Him I believed, and what was his assertion
20  I now see clearly, even as thou seest
21  Each contradiction to be false and true.

19  Io li credetti; e ciò che 'n sua fede era,
20  vegg' io or chiaro sì, come tu vedi
21  ogne contradizione e falsa e vera.

22  As soon as with the Church I moved my feet,
23  God in his grace it pleased with this high task
24  To inspire me, and I gave me wholly to it,

22  Tosto che con la Chiesa mossi i piedi,
23  a Dio per grazia piacque di spirarmi
24  l'alto lavoro, e tutto 'n lui mi diedi;

25  And to my Belisarius I commended
26  The arms, to which was heaven's right hand so joined
27  It was a signal that I should repose.

25  e al mio Belisar commendai l'armi,
26  cui la destra del ciel fu sì congiunta,
27  che segno fu ch'i' dovessi posarmi.

28  Now here to the first question terminates
29  My answer; but the character thereof
30  Constrains me to continue with a sequel,

28  Or qui a la question prima s'appunta
29  la mia risposta; ma sua condizione
30  mi stringe a seguitare alcuna giunta,

31  In order that thou see with how great reason
32  Men move against the standard sacrosanct,
33  Both who appropriate and who oppose it.

31  perché tu veggi con quanta ragione
32  si move contr' al sacrosanto segno
33  e chi 'l s'appropria e chi a lui s'oppone.

34  Behold how great a power has made it worthy
35  Of reverence, beginning from the hour
36  When Pallas died to give it sovereignty.

34  Vedi quanta virtù l'ha fatto degno
35  di reverenza; e cominciò da l'ora
36  che Pallante morì per darli regno.

37  Thou knowest it made in Alba its abode
38  Three hundred years and upward, till at last
39  The three to three fought for it yet again.

37  Tu sai ch'el fece in Alba sua dimora
38  per trecento anni e oltre, infino al fine
39  che i tre a' tre pugnar per lui ancora.

40  Thou knowest what it achieved from Sabine wrong
41  Down to Lucretia's sorrow, in seven kings
42  O'ercoming round about the neighboring nations;

40  E sai ch'el fé dal mal de le Sabine
41  al dolor di Lucrezia in sette regi,
42  vincendo intorno le genti vicine.

43  Thou knowest what it achieved, borne by the Romans
44  Illustrious against Brennus, against Pyrrhus,
45  Against the other princes and confederates.

43  Sai quel ch'el fé portato da li egregi
44  Romani incontro a Brenno, incontro a Pirro,
45  incontro a li altri principi e collegi;

46  Torquatus thence and Quinctius, who from locks
47  Unkempt was named, Decii and Fabii,
48  Received the fame I willingly embalm;

46  onde Torquato e Quinzio, che dal cirro
47  negletto fu nomato, i Deci e ' Fabi
48  ebber la fama che volontier mirro.

49  It struck to earth the pride of the Arabians,
50  Who, following Hannibal, had passed across
51  The Alpine ridges, Po, from which thou glidest;

49  Esso atterrò l'orgoglio de li Aràbi
50  che di retro ad Anibale passaro
51  l'alpestre rocce, Po, di che tu labi.

52  Beneath it triumphed while they yet were young
53  Pompey and Scipio, and to the hill
54  Beneath which thou wast born it bitter seemed;

52  Sott' esso giovanetti trïunfaro
53  Scipïone e Pompeo; e a quel colle
54  sotto 'l qual tu nascesti parve amaro.

55  Then, near unto the time when heaven had willed
56  To bring the whole world to its mood serene,
57  Did Caesar by the will of Rome assume it.

55  Poi, presso al tempo che tutto 'l ciel volle
56  redur lo mondo a suo modo sereno,
57  Cesare per voler di Roma il tolle.

58  What it achieved from Var unto the Rhine,
59  Isere beheld and Saone, beheld the Seine,
60  And every valley whence the Rhone is filled;

58  E quel che fé da Varo infino a Reno,
59  Isara vide ed Era e vide Senna
60  e ogne valle onde Rodano è pieno.

61  What it achieved when it had left Ravenna,
62  And leaped the Rubicon, was such a flight
63  That neither tongue nor pen could follow it.

61  Quel che fé poi ch'elli uscì di Ravenna
62  e saltò Rubicon, fu di tal volo,
63  che nol seguiteria lingua né penna.

64  Round towards Spain it wheeled its legions; then
65  Towards Durazzo, and Pharsalia smote
66  That to the calid Nile was felt the pain.

64  Inver' la Spagna rivolse lo stuolo,
65  poi ver' Durazzo, e Farsalia percosse
66 sì ch'al Nil caldo si sentì del duolo.

67  Antandros and the Simois, whence it started,
68  It saw again, and there where Hector lies,
69  And ill for Ptolemy then roused itself.

67  Antandro e Simeonta, onde si mosse,
68  rivide e là dov' Ettore si cuba;
69  e mal per Tolomeo poscia si scosse.

70  From thence it came like lightning upon Juba;
71  Then wheeled itself again into your West,
72  Where the Pompeian clarion it heard.

70  Da indi scese folgorando a Iuba;
71  onde si volse nel vostro occidente,
72  ove sentia la pompeana tuba.

73  From what it wrought with the next standard-bearer
74  Brutus and Cassius howl in Hell together,
75  And Modena and Perugia dolent were;

73  Di quel che fé col baiulo seguente,
74  Bruto con Cassio ne l'inferno latra,
75  e Modena e Perugia fu dolente.

76  Still doth the mournful Cleopatra weep
77  Because thereof, who, fleeing from before it,
78  Took from the adder sudden and black death.

76  Piangene ancor la trista Cleopatra,
77 che, fuggendoli innanzi, dal colubro
78  la morte prese subitana e atra.

79  With him it ran even to the Red Sea shore;
80  With him it placed the world in so great peace,
81  That unto Janus was his temple closed.

79  Con costui corse infino al lito rubro;
80  con costui puose il mondo in tanta pace,
81  che fu serrato a Giano il suo delubro.

82  But what the standard that has made me speak
83  Achieved before, and after should achieve
84  Throughout the mortal realm that lies beneath it,

82  Ma ciò che 'l segno che parlar mi face
83  fatto avea prima e poi era fatturo
84  per lo regno mortal ch'a lui soggiace,

85  Becometh in appearance mean and dim,
86  If in the hand of the third Caesar seen
87  With eye unclouded and affection pure,

85  diventa in apparenza poco e scuro,
86  se in mano al terzo Cesare si mira
87  con occhio chiaro e con affetto puro;

88  Because the living Justice that inspires me
89  Granted it, in the hand of him I speak of,
90  The glory of doing vengeance for its wrath.

88  ché la viva giustizia che mi spira,
89  li concedette, in mano a quel ch'i' dico,
90  gloria di far vendetta a la sua ira.

91  Now here attend to what I answer thee;
92  Later it ran with Titus to do vengeance
93  Upon the vengeance of the ancient sin.

91  Or qui t'ammira in ciò ch'io ti replìco:
92  poscia con Tito a far vendetta corse
93  de la vendetta del peccato antico.

94  And when the tooth of Lombardy had bitten
95  The Holy Church, then underneath its wings
96  Did Charlemagne victorious succor her.

94  E quando il dente longobardo morse
95  la Santa Chiesa, sotto le sue ali
96  Carlo Magno, vincendo, la soccorse.

97  Now hast thou power to judge of such as those
98  Whom I accused above, and of their crimes,
99  Which are the cause of all your miseries.

97  Omai puoi giudicar di quei cotali
98  ch'io accusai di sopra e di lor falli,
99  che son cagion di tutti vostri mali.

100  To the public standard one the yellow lilies
101  Opposes, the other claims it for a party,
102  So that 'tis hard to see which sins the most.

100  L'uno al pubblico segno i gigli gialli
101  oppone, e l'altro appropria quello a parte,
102 sì ch'è forte a veder chi più si falli.

103  Let, let the Ghibellines ply their handicraft
104  Beneath some other standard; for this ever
105  Ill follows he who it and justice parts.

103  Faccian li Ghibellin, faccian lor arte
104  sott' altro segno, ché mal segue quello
105  sempre chi la giustizia e lui diparte;

106  And let not this new Charles e'er strike it down,
107  He and his Guelfs, but let him fear the talons
108  That from a nobler lion stripped the fell.

106  e non l'abbatta esto Carlo novello
107  coi Guelfi suoi, ma tema de li artigli
108  ch'a più alto leon trasser lo vello.

109  Already oftentimes the sons have wept
110  The father's crime; and let him not believe
111  That God will change His scutcheon for the lilies.

109  Molte fïate già pianser li figli
110  per la colpa del padre, e non si creda
111  che Dio trasmuti l'armi per suoi gigli!

112  This little planet doth adorn itself
113  With the good spirits that have active been,
114  That fame and honour might come after them;

112  Questa picciola stella si correda
113  d'i buoni spirti che son stati attivi
114  perché onore e fama li succeda:

115  And whensoever the desires mount thither,
116  Thus deviating, must perforce the rays
117  Of the true love less vividly mount upward.

115  e quando li disiri poggian quivi,
116  sì disvïando, pur convien che i raggi
117  del vero amore in sù poggin men vivi.
118  But in commensuration of our wages
119  With our desert is portion of our joy,
120  Because we see them neither less nor greater.

118  Ma nel commensurar d'i nostri gaggi
119  col merto è parte di nostra letizia,
120  perché non li vedem minor né maggi.

121  Herein doth living Justice sweeten so
122  Affection in us, that for evermore
123  It cannot warp to any iniquity.

121  Quindi addolcisce la viva giustizia
122  in noi l'affetto sì, che non si puote
123  torcer già mai ad alcuna nequizia.

124  Voices diverse make up sweet melodies;
125  So in this life of ours the seats diverse
126  Render sweet harmony among these spheres;

124  Diverse voci fanno dolci note;
125  così diversi scanni in nostra vita
126  rendon dolce armonia tra queste rote.

127  And in the compass of this present pearl
128  Shineth the sheen of Romeo, of whom
129  The grand and beauteous work was ill rewarded.

127  E dentro a la presente margarita
128  luce la luce di Romeo, di cui
129  fu l'ovra grande e bella mal gradita.

130  But the Provencals who against him wrought,
131  They have not laughed, and therefore ill goes he
132  Who makes his hurt of the good deeds of others.

130  Ma i Provenzai che fecer contra lui
131  non hanno riso; e però mal cammina
132  qual si fa danno del ben fare altrui.

133  Four daughters, and each one of them a queen,
134  Had Raymond Berenger, and this for him
135  Did Romeo, a poor man and a pilgrim;

133  Quattro figlie ebbe, e ciascuna reina,
134  Ramondo Beringhiere, e ciò li fece
135  Romeo, persona umìle e peregrina.

136  And then malicious words incited him
137  To summon to a reckoning this just man,
138  Who rendered to him seven and five for ten.

136  E poi il mosser le parole biece
137  a dimandar ragione a questo giusto,
138  che li assegnò sette e cinque per diece,

139  Then he departed poor and stricken in years,
140  And if the world could know the heart he had,
141  In begging bit by bit his livelihood,

139  indi partissi povero e vetusto;
140  e se 'l mondo sapesse il cor ch'elli ebbe
141  mendicando sua vita a frusto a frusto,

142  Though much it laud him, it would laud him more."

142  assai lo loda, e più lo loderebbe.”

Canto VII
(Preludium/Confession: I suppose one reason I have for writing these notes, of which I am likely to be the sole reader, is to discover for myself some transformational key such as Jung discovered with his psychological insights through a reinterpretation of alchemical texts.  This poem shines a light upon areas of the psyche which could not otherwise be illuminated, and, with equal fervor, it casts into shadow much that one took for granted as a result of social conditioning.)

As one investigates the body, either through dissection or instrumentation, or by the apparati of one's own feeling sense, at some point one is struck by the fact that each level of examination appears only as a surface, the penetration of which leads only to another surface, the idea of function, of life, at every surface retreating into another surface, the whole becoming ever more ephemeral but never fundamentally causal.  It is as if the operation of the mind transforms the object of its contemplation into that which is conducive to its own tools and habits of perception, so that mind itself becomes not only the determinant of how we see but also of the qualities of what we see.  I find the interpretation of Dante's text to be much the same, commentaries, insights, lead to further commentary and insight but nothing is final, and all that we discover about the text becomes an analogue for anything possible to be discovered by the mind in search of itself.  What is this glossalia of Hebrew and Latin that begins this canto, and how are these musical notes transformed into a double light doubling itself, which move as in a dance of  swiftly hurrying lights receding suddenly in the distance as the distance?  Besides the meeting of surface and subsurface at a distinguishing membranous surface, the collusion/collision of photons meeting photons, besides matter and mind, there is this relationship between the two, wherein surface becomes something impossible both to dispense with or to altogether elucidate, an aesthetic whose new style — if it is new — is not so much descriptive in the meaning of its sounds as by its sounds an invocation of that mind/nature duality mimetic of the divine/human nature of Christ.  What is this boundary between being and not being which sound chases into silence, and which matter loses in the cloud of mind?  Is it love? — the attraction of the question for the answer as sure as the baby's cry releases the mother's milk.  Well, if it is love, it is a love which is in its essence an act of imagination, a devotion that conjures connection between those apparently irreconcilable aspects of existence, which logic alone can never conjoin.  We found in the Heaven of the Moon how the inconstancy of grammar spelled out the constancy of salvation for those who had been inconstant in their vows.  And we find in the Heaven of Mercury, a dialectical logic displaying the law as an imbalance of the scales of justice, which find their equilibrium in the salvation of the unjust.  The problems exposed here are insoluble in our three dimensions of space and single dimension of time.  They can only be resolved from the metaposition of another dimension by poetic inference to a universe wherein another degree of freedom is possible, because Time's line is volumized into a simultaneity and the three dimensions of space are linguistically expanded by an imaginative expansion of love.  Is this a communion or a consummation? a linguistic intrusion from a hyperdimension or a poetic escape that leaves the ordinary concerns of such surface dwellers as ourselves lost in a weltering wake of the incomprehensible, and perhaps, from the point of view of our everyday practical concerns, into that which is completely inconsequential to matter or to mind, but indispensable to their relationship.  

An enormous drama is taking place inside of the aspirant Dante, an interior conflict, wherein his voice is swallowed inside of him.   He hears, or he imagines he hears, her childhood nickname, and the mere sound of the syllables BAY  EE CHAY act as a trigger for a conditioned response that sends him into what should be written in capital letters:  THE BEAUTIFUL BEATIFIC STATE, that state that he first felt at the age of nine when gazing for the first time on the nine year-old Beatrice.  He cannot speak, but the text in a flurry of "D" alliterations, sends him reeling back to that moment so vividly described in the Vita Nuova, when once before he did not speak, although here,  gored by doubt, he cries out within himself in a boyhood reiteration of the phrase "IN THE BEGINNING WAS THE WORD" and the Word was a bell tolling three times: Tell her!  Tell her!  Tell her!  

10  Io dubitava e dicea “Dille, dille!”
11  fra me, “dille” dicea, “a la mia donna
12  che mi diseta con le dolci stille.”

Those words express his histrionic thirst to the sweet lady who, alone, through the effluent of her presence, can slake it.  He has to go back to that point of origin again and again because only that feeling gives him the proof that validates this feeling of transcendence, which has lifted him out of the suffering and the corruption that he feels in his own body and in the body politic that has sent him into exile.  Readers who have suffered with him, go back with him through all the ditches of the Inferno, all the torturous ledges of the Purgatorio, and they too know what's at stake in their own bodies, in their own place in history, and they know that no one has so taken to heart that suffering, that injustice displayed throughout all nature and all history, and they too thirst to have that pain justified through some sort of redemption.  They too need to have that pain square somehow with the idea of a Just and Good God, who created a creation so like Himself, so full of pain and corruption in all its mortal elements, in all its plant and animal kingdoms, but so full also of THE BEAUTIFUL BEATIFIC STATE, when, in any moment, all of suffering material matter might be suddenly seen in a NEW STYLE, in a light of praise for what had been in the silent, love-struck self ineffable.  Here, a smile, a word from that LADY, his lady, our lady — or for women, her adored and adoring man — justifies that pain, makes it unreal, and more than balances the intolerable weight of material agony.  This whole canto is an apology for history's tortures, an argument. not only for the existence of a just and good God, but for a sense of beauty and beatitude that Jesus must have felt at the most excruciating moment of the crucifixion, when the sky was rent, and the earth shook, and the secret was at last revealed.  For those of us who have seen such things as the evil of the Nazi's holocaust, or the wholesale ecological destruction of the planet, or who have contemplated the suicide of a nuclear war.  For those of us who know how stars are born in fiery violence and how they die in the crushing, lightless press of perverse gravity.  For those of us who have seen our loved ones die of cancer, or in war, or by accident or disease, and who have felt those same corruptions invading their own bodies, it seems to me, that none of Beatrice's arguments, her mercurial logic, her tortured dialectics ring true.  Her words are neither just nor justified.  They do not balance the scale.  But her voice, her presence, the sound of that new style, that, that is mesmerizing, and the aspirant upon hearing them falls into a swoon, and in that swoon the spurious and silly arguments for a just God and a good creation are seen in a double light, a light that shows death and corruption as clearly a part of something utterly OTHER, utterly convincing, and self-justifying.   And just as it might dawn us that the very first atoms of the very first stars of our universe still comprise everything that is, still in their self-same dance, to the self-same music, enact the drama of THE BEAUTIFUL BEATIFIC STATE again and again right in the midst of all that temporal and temporary pain and corruption, that, that revelation gives solace, and we think, we feel: Maybe all arguments are hollow, but the poetry is as hallowed as a deathbed confession or an infant's primal cry.

The question is this: Can a reader who does not accept as truth the unstated assumptions that Beatrice makes about the motives of a Christian conceived God, find in the poetry, something underlying her arguments which can strip away those assumptions to reveal the riches of a consciousness — that BEAUTIFUL BEATIFIC STATE — that will give to him or her the same assurances of love that made Dante trust Beatrice's accounts as the ultimate salve to his own fears and doubts — which brings us to another question, Does Dante the poet accept what Dante the aspirant accepts of a cosmology that postulates a God much too much like a fallible human in His motives for love and hate, vengeance, justice, and mercy, a God, too much like ourselves, and much, much too full of those all too human attributes to explain the vast miracle of Creation, even in the limited conception of ALL THAT IS,  which held sway in Dante's place and time, let alone what we know now of a Universe with at least 42 levels of magnitude from the pangalactic to the subatomic, and even further, to the explorations of the physicists who postulate other universes with additional dimensions that exceed our own three of space and one of time?   Because, there lurks behind Beatrice's seriousness a kind of adolescent quality that we all may remember from college, when with audacious self-importance, and little experience, we junior philosophers asked the same kind of questions as Dante asks here, although he does not speak, which is a salient point in and of itself.  Does he put things in Beatrice's mouth that he wants to believe or that he wants the reader to believe?  Both?  Neither?  And finally, do we even care if the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus was just or unjust or if the supposed incarnation was the only way to restore humanity to a condition of blessedness that few believe ever existed or ever could exist in a world where a mother may have to struggle with a handicapped child or a man might have to cope with a terminal diagnosis or a wholesale political and economic collapse or a war might launch a great deal of the population into an early or late grave, or into the hells of addiction or homelessness or, as is the case in my own now's now, when a pandemic sweeps across the globe indiscriminately killing the just and the unjust — if this is our world — what possible remedies could poetry or religious belief systems offer that would mitigated these outrages, that would or could explain how such catastrophes might spawn a state of permanent, transcendent bliss.  Can the same life circumstances that foment our terrors and our agonies also be the seed for an ongoing experience of joy, or as some gurus tell us, from what we hope is their own experience derived from spiritual disciplines — a causeless, ceaseless, ever-new joy?   

Between that last sentence and this, my night-long insomnia was intruded upon by a period of sleep, in which I dreamed that the bones of my body became a kind of liquified lava, and that which in waking life was stiff, became, not only malleable, but malleable through volition.  They became flexible with an inner life so that I could change their shape at will.  Eventually I awakened with a cramp in the top of my foot, and that parallel reality of sleep gave way to that state we call awake, which, had I not immediately written this, would have utterly obliterated the dream reality in the course of a few moments.  Note that here, after the lines "tell me, tell me, tell me," interiorly spoken by the aspirant, and quoted in this text above, the speechless Dante falls into a drowse, the entire incident triggered by Beatrice's smile, a conditioned response, identical to a hypnotist's pre-installed suggestion.  Here, the protagonist says something, which is impossible in the logical world we perhaps mistakenly call waking.  He says that the words that that smile ignited him, have made him happy, even had his body been burning in the midst of his fire.  Some might remember that in the early days of America's ill-fated adventure in Vietnam, the protest of a Buddhist monk, who set himself ablaze, and maintained with calm his meditation posture while the horrific flames consumed his body.  The text here presents an analogous situation.  One's experience of reality, maybe even one's reality, is determined by a state of consciousness, which is an absolutely excruciating idea, but an idea that anyone can "prove" for themselves by a simple comparison of waking with dreaming.  Of course, when we are awake, we privilege the waking state above the dreaming one, but the dream state just as thoroughly negates the waking one.   The two states are clearly related, but related by a process of mutual obliteration.   Question: Are the logos of poetry and logic of prose also fused by a like process of reciprical annilation?  The entire text of the Commedia is an exploration, not so much of history, or myth, or theology, or cosmology, or of the self or of our myriad selves, or even or the waking state's  perceptions of time and space, but of consciousness itself.   And the instrument, which probes those worlds of history, myth, theology, et al, is poetic language, woven with both dreamlike fluidity and numerical and even cryptological precision.  The position of reader to the meaning of the text, i.e., the experience of reading while we read, and while contemplating what has been read and anticipating what is yet to be read, is anagogically akin to the position of Dante, the aspirant inside the poem to Dante the writer, creating the poem.  That all these selves are generated by states of consciousness, which is everywhere in the text embodied by its characters, be they that of Virgil, or of the damned, or of the saved, or here, in the person of Beatrice, who brings peace, and love, and not least of all that aesthetic beatific beauty which is able to make and sustain whole universes.

What is being proposed in Canto VI of the Paradiso?  One proposition is that the Adam state of consciousness, which Blake astutely calls the "limit of contraction," cannot from inside that state have any tools to expand or transcend its own limitations.  The text here says that ordinary mortal life with its survival concerns, its prestige concerns, its addictions to sex or food or fashion or belonging is Adamic, and by the mere fact of being born and confining or contracting ourselves to a particular prison of time and space, we all suffer the sin of Adam, and the precise nature of that sin is that it generates its own parameters for contraction.  You do not have to be a Christian to be a son or daughter of Adam, wherein all one's knowledge, all one's experience forges a chain of opposing dualities, of likes and dislikes, goods and evils, preferences and anathemas.  One rule for change, for expansion, is that something out there, beyond the boundary of the rules of the constricted self, be it a devil or an angel, must intrude as an agent of transformation.  Another rule for change is that it is possible only by being simultaneously in the present state and in the parallel expanded presence — i.e. thoroughly and completely being that which one is —  while thoroughly and completely being in a new expanded Is-ness.  For Beatrice, here, the sole Self capable of simultaneously being in both of these positions is what or whom she calls God, and God's instrument of change is on the one hand love, and on the other hand that ability to totally empathize with the suffering, pain, and terror of the state of consciousness of his creations, but always without ever losing the ability to resurrect love in those circumstances, and to leverage that love to achieve states of bliss inconceivable to the contracted self.   Read in this way, all of the rest of Beatrice's scholastic exposition becomes a recipe for the adolescent seeker to achieve spiritual maturity, to ask to be humble enough to realize his or her own state, and to be honest about it, and then, with neither pride nor shame, to explore those domains of consciousness which open at her words.  Are Beatrice's solutions for transcendence of the limited, suffering self, the sole possible ones?  Maybe not, but one thing seems certain, to vacillate, to not choose (remember the fates of those in the anteroom of Hell) is a sure way to the damnation of stuckness, the death that is stasis, and perpetuation of agonizing limitation.  The question is not: Are Beatrice's propositions true?  But rather, do they lead to THE BEAUTIFUL BEATIFIC STATE? 

It has been said that Western religions — Christianity, Judaism, Islam — are religions of the Word, and that Eastern religions — Hinduism, Buddhism, Taoism — religions of practice, i.e. some sort of spiritualizing methodology such as meditation or yoga.  For the West, the Word is exoteric and method is esoteric.  For the East, that hierarchy is reversed.  But it's not true that Beatrice's "Word" is the only guidance given in the text: there is also prayer, contemplative practice, right action, dreams, imagination, music, dance, song, chanting, and of course, mostly the medium of the poetry itself.  The exoteric (the hair) and the esoteric (the horns) are but two sides of the same animal or angel, and they are linked by a relationship that is by turns painful or pleasurable, but always some form of love, some aspect that could be seen as beauty.  And how does Dante discern which contrasting element is being displayed in any given space/time?   He discerns via a seasoned aesthetic, that is, by the practice of an artistry analogous to both Creator and creation.        

1  "Osanna sanctus Deus Sabaoth,
2  Superillustrans claritate tua
3  Felices ignes horum malahoth!"

1  “Osanna, sanctus Deus sabaòth,
2  superillustrans claritate tua
3  felices ignes horum malacòth!”

4  In this wise, to his melody returning,
5  This substance, upon which a double light
6  Doubles itself, was seen by me to sing,

4  Così, volgendosi a la nota sua,
5  fu viso a me cantare essa sustanza,
6  sopra la qual doppio lume s'addua;

7  And to their dance this and the others moved,
8  And in the manner of swift-hurrying sparks
9  Veiled themselves from me with a sudden distance.

7  ed essa e l'altre mossero a sua danza,
8  e quasi velocissime faville
9  mi si velar di sùbita distanza.

10  Doubting was I, and saying, "Tell her, tell her,"
11  Within me, "tell her," saying, "tell my Lady,"
12  Who slakes my thirst with her sweet effluences;

10  Io dubitava e dicea “Dille, dille!”
11  fra me, “dille” dicea, “a la mia donna
12  che mi diseta con le dolci stille.”

13  And yet that reverence which doth lord it over
14  The whole of me only by B and ICE,
15  Bowed me again like unto one who drowses.

13  Ma quella reverenza che s'indonna
14  di tutto me, pur per Be e per ice,
15  mi richinava come l'uom ch'assonna.

16  Short while did Beatrice endure me thus;
17  And she began, lighting me with a smile
18  Such as would make one happy in the fire:

16  Poco sofferse me cotal Beatrice
17  e cominciò, raggiandomi d'un riso
18  tal, che nel foco faria l'uom felice:

19  "According to infallible advisement,
20  After what manner a just vengeance justly
21  Could be avenged has put thee upon thinking,

19  “Secondo mio infallibile avviso,
20  come giusta vendetta giustamente
21  punita fosse, t'ha in pensier miso;

22  But I will speedily thy mind unloose;
23  And do thou listen, for these words of mine
24  Of a great doctrine will a present make thee.

22  ma io ti solverò tosto la mente;
23  e tu ascolta, ché le mie parole
24  di gran sentenza ti faran presente.

25  By not enduring on the power that wills
26  Curb for his good, that man who ne'er was born,
27  Damning himself damned all his progeny;

25  Per non soffrire a la virtù che vole
26  freno a suo prode, quell' uom che non nacque,
27  dannando sé, dannò tutta sua prole;

28  Whereby the human species down below
29  Lay sick for many centuries in great error,
30  Till to descend it pleased the Word of God

28  onde l'umana specie inferma giacque
29  giù per secoli molti in grande errore,
30  fin ch'al Verbo di Dio discender piacque

31  To where the nature, which from its own Maker
32  Estranged itself, he joined to him in person
33  By the sole act of his eternal love.

31  u' la natura, che dal suo fattore
32  s'era allungata, unì a sé in persona
33  con l'atto sol del suo etterno amore.

34  Now unto what is said direct thy sight;
35  This nature when united to its Maker,
36  Such as created, was sincere and good;

34  Or drizza il viso a quel ch'or si ragiona:
35  questa natura al suo fattore unita,
36  qual fu creata, fu sincera e buona;

37  But by itself alone was banished forth
38  From Paradise, because it turned aside
39  Out of the way of truth and of its life.

37  ma per sé stessa pur fu ella sbandita
38  di paradiso, però che si torse
39  da via di verità e da sua vita.

40  Therefore the penalty the cross held out,
41  If measured by the nature thus assumed,
42  None ever yet with so great justice stung,

40  La pena dunque che la croce porse
41  s'a la natura assunta si misura,
42  nulla già mai sì giustamente morse;

43  And none was ever of so great injustice,
44  Considering who the Person was that suffered,
45  Within whom such a nature was contracted.

43  e così nulla fu di tanta ingiura,
44  guardando a la persona che sofferse,
45  in che era contratta tal natura.
46  From one act therefore issued things diverse;
47  To God and to the Jews one death was pleasing;
48  Earth trembled at it and the Heaven was opened.

46  Però d'un atto uscir cose diverse:
47  ch'a Dio e a' Giudei piacque una morte;
48  per lei tremò la terra e 'l ciel s'aperse.

49  It should no longer now seem difficult
50  To thee, when it is said that a just vengeance
51  By a just court was afterward avenged.

49  Non ti dee oramai parer più forte,
50  quando si dice che giusta vendetta
51  poscia vengiata fu da giusta corte.

52  But now do I behold thy mind entangled
53  From thought to thought within a knot, from which
54  With great desire it waits to free itself.

52  Ma io veggi' or la tua mente ristretta
53  di pensiero in pensier dentro ad un nodo,
54  del qual con gran disio solver s'aspetta.

55  Thou sayest, 'Well discern I what I hear;
56  But it is hidden from me why God willed
57  For our redemption only this one mode.'

55  Tu dici: 'Ben discerno ciò ch'i' odo;
56  ma perché Dio volesse, m'è occulto,
57  a nostra redenzion pur questo modo.'

58  Buried remaineth, brother, this decree
59  Unto the eyes of every one whose nature
60  Is in the flame of love not yet adult.

58  Questo decreto, frate, sta sepulto
59  a li occhi di ciascuno il cui ingegno
60  ne la fiamma d'amor non è adulto.

61  Verily, inasmuch as at this mark
62  One gazes long and little is discerned,
63  Wherefore this mode was worthiest will I say.

61  Veramente, però ch'a questo segno
62  molto si mira e poco si discerne,
63  dirò perché tal modo fu più degno.

64  Goodness Divine, which from itself doth spurn
65  All envy, burning in itself so sparkles
66  That the eternal beauties it unfolds.

64  La divina bontà, che da sé sperne
65  ogne livore, ardendo in sé, sfavilla
66  sì che dispiega le bellezze etterne.

67  Whate'er from this immediately distils
68  Has afterwards no end, for ne'er removed
69  Is its impression when it sets its seal.

67  Ciò che da lei sanza mezzo distilla
68  non ha poi fine, perché non si move
69  la sua imprenta quand' ella sigilla.

70  Whate'er from this immediately rains down
71  Is wholly free, because it is not subject
73  Unto the influences of novel things.

70  Ciò che da essa sanza mezzo piove
71  libero è tutto, perché non soggiace
72  a la virtute de le cose nove.

73  The more conformed thereto, the more it pleases;
74  For the blest ardour that irradiates all things
75  In that most like itself is most vivacious.

73  Più l'è conforme, e però più le piace;
74  ché l'ardor santo ch'ogne cosa raggia,
75  ne la più somigliante è più vivace.

76  With all of these things has advantaged been
77  The human creature; and if one be wanting,
78  From his nobility he needs must fall.

76  Di tutte queste dote s'avvantaggia
77  l'umana creatura, e s'una manca,
78  di sua nobilità convien che caggia.

79  'Tis sin alone which doth disfranchise him,
80  And render him unlike the Good Supreme,
81  So that he little with its light is blanched,

79  Solo il peccato è quel che la disfranca
80  e falla dissimìle al sommo bene,
81  per che del lume suo poco s'imbianca;

82  And to his dignity no more returns,
83  Unless he fill up where transgression empties
84  With righteous pains for criminal delights.

82  e in sua dignità mai non rivene,
83  se non rïempie, dove colpa vòta,
84  contra mal dilettar con giuste pene.

85  Your nature when it sinned so utterly
86  In its own seed, out of these dignities
87  Even as out of Paradise was driven,

85  Vostra natura, quando peccò tota
86  nel seme suo, da queste dignitadi,
87  come di paradiso, fu remota;

88  Nor could itself recover, if thou notest
89  With nicest subtilty, by any way,
90  Except by passing one of these two fords:

88  né ricovrar potiensi, se tu badi
89  ben sottilmente, per alcuna via,
90  sanza passar per un di questi guadi:

91  Either that God through clemency alone
92  Had pardon granted, or that man himself
93  Had satisfaction for his folly made.

91  o che Dio solo per sua cortesia
92  dimesso avesse, o che l'uom per sé isso
93  avesse sodisfatto a sua follia.

94  Fix now thine eye deep into the abyss
95  Of the eternal counsel, to my speech
96  As far as may be fastened steadfastly!

94  Ficca mo l'occhio per entro l'abisso
95  de l'etterno consiglio, quanto puoi
96  al mio parlar distrettamente fisso.

97  Man in his limitations had not power
98  To satisfy, not having power to sink
99  In his humility obeying then,

97  Non potea l'uomo ne' termini suoi
98  mai sodisfar, per non potere ir giuso
99  con umiltate obedïendo poi,

100  Far as he disobeying thought to rise;
101  And for this reason man has been from power
102  Of satisfying by himself excluded.

100  quanto disobediendo intese ir suso;
101  e questa è la cagion per che l'uom fue
102  da poter sodisfar per sé dischiuso.

103  Therefore it God behoved in his own ways
104  Man to restore unto his perfect life,
105  I say in one, or else in both of them.

103  Dunque a Dio convenia con le vie sue
104  riparar l'omo a sua intera vita,
105  dico con l'una, o ver con amendue.

106  But since the action of the doer is
107  So much more grateful, as it more presents
108  The goodness of the heart from which it issues,

106  Ma perché l'ovra tanto è più gradita
107  da l'operante, quanto più appresenta
108  de la bontà del core ond' ell' è uscita

109  Goodness Divine, that doth imprint the world,
110  Has been contented to proceed by each
111  And all its ways to lift you up again;

109  la divina bontà che 'l mondo imprenta,
110  di proceder per tutte le sue vie,
111  a rilevarvi suso, fu contenta.

112  Nor 'twixt the first day and the final night
113  Such high and such magnificent proceeding
114  By one or by the other was or shall be;

112  Né tra l'ultima notte e 'l primo die
113  sì alto o sì magnifico processo,
114  o per l'una o per l'altra, fu o fie:

115  For God more bounteous was himself to give
116  To make man able to uplift himself,
117  Than if he only of himself had pardoned;

115  ché più largo fu Dio a dar sé stesso
116  per far l'uom sufficiente a rilevarsi,
117  che s'elli avesse sol da sé dimesso;

118  And all the other modes were insufficient
119  For justice, were it not the Son of God
120  Himself had humbled to become incarnate.

118  e tutti li altri modi erano scarsi
119  a la giustizia, se 'l Figliuol di Dio
120  non fosse umilïato ad incarnarsi.

121  Now, to fill fully each desire of thine,
122  Return I to elucidate one place,
123  In order that thou there mayst see as I do.

121  Or per empierti bene ogne disio,
122  ritorno a dichiararti in alcun loco,
123  perché tu veggi lì così com' io.

124  Thou sayst: 'I see the air, I see the fire,
125  The water, and the earth, and all their mixtures
126  Come to corruption, and short while endure;

124  Tu dici: 'Io veggio l'acqua, io veggio il foco,
125  l'aere e la terra e tutte lor misture
126  venire a corruzione, e durar poco;

127  And these things notwithstanding were created;'
128  Therefore if that which I have said were true,
129  They should have been secure against corruption.

127  e queste cose pur furon creature;
128  per che, se ciò ch'è detto è stato vero,
129  esser dovrien da corruzion sicure.'

130  The Angels, brother, and the land sincere
131  In which thou art, created may be called
132  Just as they are in their entire existence;

130  Li angeli, frate, e 'l paese sincero
131  nel qual tu se', dir si posson creati,
132  sì come sono, in loro essere intero;

133  But all the elements which thou hast named,
134  And all those things which out of them are made,
135  By a created virtue are informed.

133  ma li alimenti che tu hai nomati
134  e quelle cose che di lor si fanno
135  da creata virtù sono informati.

136  Created was the matter which they have;
137  Created was the informing influence
138  Within these stars that round about them go.

136  Creata fu la materia ch'elli hanno;
137 creata fu la virtù informante
138  in queste stelle che 'ntorno a lor vanno.

139  The soul of every brute and of the plants
140  By its potential temperament attracts
141  The ray and motion of the holy lights;

139  L'anima d'ogne bruto e de le piante
140  di complession potenzïata tira
141  lo raggio e 'l moto de le luci sante;

142  But your own life immediately inspires
143  Supreme Beneficence, and enamours it
144  So with herself, it evermore desires her.

142  ma vostra vita sanza mezzo spira
143  la somma beninanza, e la innamora
144  di sé sì che poi sempre la disira.

145  And thou from this mayst argue furthermore
146  Your resurrection, if thou think again
147  How human flesh was fashioned at that time

145  E quinci puoi argomentare ancora
146  vostra resurrezion, se tu ripensi
147  come l'umana carne fessi allora

148  When the first parents both of them were made."

148  che li primi parenti intrambo fensi.”

Canto VIII
The heaven of Venus may be compared to Rhetoric because of two properties: one is the brightness of its aspect, which is sweeter to look upon than that of any other star; the other is its appearance now in the morning, now in the evening. And these two properties are found in Rhetoric: for Rhetoric is sweeter than all of the other sciences, since this is what it principally aims at; and it appears in the morning when the rhetorician speaks before the face of his hearer, and it appears in the evening (that is, behind) when the rhetorician speaks through writing, from a distance.

Convivio, Book II, Chapter 13

 As we get deeper into the Paradiso, we are finding how problematic it becomes to insert God into the history of mortals, with all their self-aggrandizing desires and terrors, and all their capricious violence, which as the Inferno so vividly illustrates, goes so far beyond any of the necessary violence of what a Victorian Darwinian imagination would call "the survival of the fittest,"  because, all of our efforts to escape this violence entangle us in a rhetoric infused with past and future conditional verb tenses.  To make God the judicator of mortal action, he must be God the Good to be God the Just, else his laws are evil, or worse, irrelevant, to actual actions and events.  The main speaker in this canto, never revealed by name, as if to do so would ensnare the speaker in the taboo that the name-saying of the infinite entails — namely particularizing in the mind and in the heart, a figure who can be figured out, fingered and judged.  Note how the Yahweh, or YHWH, has essentially become a name for the Tetragrammatonistic command of: That which shall not be named.   Charles Martel (not the famous, not the Charles Martel) but a petty king, who died young, and who, so the text implies, would have, like Hamlet, ruled most beatifically and justly "had he been put on."  But the point is, he was never "put on," and moreover his spawn, contrary to the generally perceived genetic notion that like begets like, who were in fact put on, turned out to be tyrants, whose misrule degenerated into rapaciousness and had to be consigned by that Just God who did nothing to mitigate their historical horrors to an ahistorical Hell.  How does all this pertain to the sphere of Venus?  And to the art of rhetoric?  These questions devolve to the same slipperiness of the question that still dogs us whenever we look at the physical, mortal world: How has an omnipotent and omniscient Increatum God created a world so rife with the most abominable violence and injustice?  How does an Auschwitz or a Pol Pot or a cancer ward full of children come into existence if a God with the power and the knowledge to do so, does not intervene justly to alleviate unjust suffering?  This is a tough question to be sure, but one that seldom occupies any but an novitiate's mind, insofar as life itself does quite enough to involve either children or mature adults, living itself providing more than sufficient moment to moment grist to keep its pilgrims from straying into the byways of philosophy or theology, which is why at least one commentator, John Saly, Dante's Paradiso: the Flowering of the Self, relegates the sphere of Venus to the life stage of youth, a time when the post-adolescent seeks the solution of all life's problems in the crucible of Love.  But how much of what youth calls love is narcissistic infatuation?   And how many of those early infatuations actually evolve into a mutual admiration and trust, and do not keep circulating round and round the empty rhetoric of pleasure, whose one question remains: What's in it for me?  One could say that rhetoric as the art of pleasant persuasion is the ultimate advertiser's or politician's propagandistic syrup to sweeten this sales pitch for the existence of a Just God, or for that matter, of any kind of a God which might be worthy of worship out of love (Venus) and not fear (Mars).  (The story of Aeneas and Dido alluded to here in line 9, a pagan story, because when Mars leaves Venus, love dies.)  Because the old serpentining of these two opposites, as the opposites of justice and injustice, peace and violence, retribution and mercy, just refuses to stop their fornications, and the whole of our arts of grammar, dialectical logic, and rhetoric, which form the very basis of our minds, find it impossible to speak at all without revealing that beneath the best of their expressions lurks all this irony of the unexpressed construction, and all of the horror that their deceptive and masking arabesquing have entailed.  Always behind those smiling words cruel fangs are dripping blood.  Remember the unnamed speaker here, from a blinding ephemera of light, himself an insubstantial light, does not speak from any kind of probing of facts and their expression, he does not speak to say what is, but to give pleasure, to say what his listener is most soothed and joyed to hear.  The speaker is an adman, a salesman who is selling whatever it is that we are most motivated to buy, and like all good pushers, the first dose of his drug is free.  Only afterwards do we have to deal with the consequences of this rush, the irony that the monarchy that he propose would be a dictatorship which could never exist without enforcing is deviant monotony on deviants.  The paradise that the speaker is pushing must perforce be hypothetical and spoken about in conditional terms, because the speaker himself, and certainly the listener, is ironically entangled in that most obtuse arrogance of the divinely submissive, which is: I am always right.   We would do well to remember, or should I say "not forget" when we read this text, of the diachronic split in Dante himself, the Dante inside the poem accepting of the unnamed speaker's rhetoric, and the nomad, political exile outside the poem, condemned to death in his own home city, and moving about in an historical nightmare, so that it just may be that in this case neither Dante is consciously aware of the other, and moreover, if they were (there's that conditional tense again), that awareness might well occasion the kind of atheistic shock that so shattered 20th Century existentialists like Camus and Sartre.  The gap between what is and could be teems like those areas on old maritime maps, a terra incognita which can only be captioned: Here be monsters.  All that being said, I would not like to exchange the fundamentalism of a conditional hope for the fundamentalism of an unchanging cynical irony.  Both types of fundamentalism have to deal with the issues of free will and the possibility, indeed, the inevitability of change and of difference.  If the conditional is too often the home of false hope, and the apprehension of a current or coming despair, in its domain there is still wiggle room for the creation of a renewing, one might even say, ever-renewing, creative bliss.  Most people in pain do not wish to perpetuate it, although they might well do so to protect an identity (an ideal) in which pain is foundational.  Even the shades in Hell, as Dante shows, although incapable of realizing how their identity perpetuates their suffering, do almost universally (the "almost" is important), no matter how futile their method, hope to mitigate or at least justify their agony through blame, deceit, or some attempt to ensnare others in their fate, and so forth, and in this they differ profoundly with those in Purgatory, who accept their condition without such dodges, and who thereby render their condition of suffering conditional.  There's not much room for the ironic in their situation because they embrace their suffering as a condition of their release from it.  They have given up hiding and evading what Jung would call the shadow, and thus the very idea of rhetorical pleasantries for the purpose of persuasion to some position other than what is is impossible for them.  If rhetoric is the art of playing up one side of an expression and toning down or redacting those things that negate your argument, then irony while being inevitable, is also hoisted on its own petard.  Once we begin examining the multiple-sidedness of any issue, the seeds of rhetoric begin to drift off into poetic tangents, like dreamy adolescents, picking the petals from daisies with the conditional oscillation of "she loves me/she loves me not," a love affair with the open question, which is more of an aesthetic ideal than a philosophical hunt for the truth, the question being more fulfilling, and more fruitful in terms of generating (A good word, seeing as how generation is a major subject in this canto as we know from the first with the reference to the mother and offspring of Venus in lines 7 and 8.) the kind of feelings and behaviors that enhance an exploration of the beloved and also, the state of being in love. 

But here we are in the Heaven of Venus, and of all things, we are talking about Empire, as a foundation for what very few of us in this early 21st Century Western Yuga would call Love.  We have to come to grips here with what for Dante was of paramount importance in determining the relationship — the love relationship — between the physical — and by this he includes the body and all its appetites, which are of the domain of Eros, and the physical senses, and which in Hobbesian fashion are blown up to the proportions of the social collective in the body-politic, and the metaphysical — those things like the biases of belief, or the torrents of emotion, which weigh and value all things relational, and to which his particular historical metaphysics attempted to evaluate by such now quaint notions as an anthropomorphic God.  Whose (or we might say "What") system of laws and mores govern this seemingly ungovernable world of the physical senses and their voracious and — even in, or should we say, especially in the domains of eating and reproduction — violent appetites and lusts?  Going back to Bateson, and his logical hierarchies, we find that Dante's ideas about Empire, be it the Empire of political or Religious authority, can nest quite comfortably in that mental construct, and that these ideals found their template in an idea that came to be known as "The Great Chain of Being," which was a series of linkages connecting the simplest, and in this metaphor, lowest entities, in successive and higher orders of complexity and inclusiveness, to the highest, in this case the angelic orders and finally, the ultimate of ultimates, God.   Dante's philosophical enterprise  of clarifying and determining the order of these relationships and the laws of government should not seem strange to us.  For each of us has a similar enterprise in determining how the myriad cells and biota of the physical body come together to create the entity we call "Me."   And what a strange thing it is that beyond the skin-boundaries of this organ sack, like a single cell of the body, it too is embedded in orders of social and environmental complexities which seem to seethe with capricious and violent appetites, whose evolutionary laws and mores, if we might call them that, too often, seemingly void of any entity-like identity, which might order them, seem more like a chaos ruled by random violence than a system of order which is capable — if not designed — as a home, whether in Nature or Culture, is capable, in fact, with a little interventionist jimmying at least, of providing for its own constituents.  How can this condition in which we find ourselves, of whose chemicals and forces we are composed, be not only inimical to our existence, rather than nourishing, but stranger still: Strange.  Dante realized that love is an encounter with the strangest of all phenomenon, the Other, and the urge to love, to conflate our identity with this alien is the same urge that prompted princes and Papists to build a universal Empire, as body politic, or as universal Church, and to provide metaphysical principals that governed, perhaps we should say, harmonized, those physical and metaphysical realms.  The most pressing need of this hunter/gatherer, terrestrial surface-dweller, which calls itself human, is the need to move into the perpetual unknown to find that which it needs to survive, but even beyond this need, is the need to end its dangerous nomadic condition of exile, the condition of being the Stranger, and find for itself a home, a spouse, a loving family.  But how is this to be accomplished?  Assimilation — eating, digestion — is a violent project that begins in taking life and ends in combustion, while reproduction, the propagation of life of like to like — may be antagonistic, but both share the need to conflate the self with the not-self, the possessed with the dispossessed, and both have to cross the border of that which would be conserved and that which must change to live.

All of this canto, and all of the Commedia preceding it, and proceeding from it, keeps circling around a centralizing force, which in the individual we have come to refer to as the ego, and which, in the collective, I have attributed to that rather bizarre magical term, the Egregore.  In this canto, as in the previous canto, and indeed throughout all three canticles, is the idea of flow, here seen as the description of the course of Empire following the drainage regimes of rivers.  There are two metaphors here, which are irrevocably (note the "vocal" in that word), conflated — that is — flicker and flow.   If there is a God which harmonizes, and in which or whom, everything that is is, with all those questions of origin, generation, development, and destiny, all those questions of language which come to their supreme expression in poetry, than we might best recognize the attributes of such an existence in the conditional and mesmerizing allurements embodied in these conflated yet oppositional pairs: flicker and flow.  That which is here for an instant, and that which is present alway, that which is ever changing and that which is always the same, that which is behind us in the past, around us in the present, and before us in the future.  Of course, the metaphors for God or Self or Time or Language or Cosmos can never be definitive, but that is the magic of metaphor, to say precisely through constant equivocation that which cannot be said.

1  The world used in its peril to believe
2  That the fair Cypria delirious love
3  Rayed out, in the third epicycle turning;

1  Solea creder lo mondo in suo periclo
2  che la bella Ciprigna il folle amore
3  raggiasse, volta nel terzo epiciclo;

4  Wherefore not only unto her paid honour
5  Of sacrifices and of votive cry
6  The ancient nations in the ancient error,

4  per che non pur a lei faceano onore
5  di sacrificio e di votivo grido
6  le genti antiche ne l'antico errore;

7  But both Dione honoured they and Cupid,
8  That as her mother, this one as her son,
9  And said that he had sat in Dido's lap;

7  ma Dïone onoravano e Cupido,
8  quella per madre sua, questo per figlio,
9  e dicean ch'el sedette in grembo a Dido;

10  And they from her, whence I beginning take,
11  Took the denomination of the star
12  That woos the sun, now following, now in front.

10  e da costei ond' io principio piglio
11  pigliavano il vocabol de la stella
12  che 'l sol vagheggia or da coppa or da ciglio.

13  I was not ware of our ascending to it;
14  But of our being in it gave full faith
15  My Lady whom I saw more beauteous grow.

13  Io non m'accorsi del salire in ella;
14  ma d'esservi entro mi fé assai fede
15  la donna mia ch'i' vidi far più bella.

16  And as within a flame a spark is seen,
17  And as within a voice a voice discerned,
18  When one is steadfast, and one comes and goes,

16  E come in fiamma favilla si vede,
17  e come in voce voce si discerne,
18  quand' una è ferma e altra va e riede,

19  Within that light beheld I other lamps
20  Move in a circle, speeding more and less,
21  Methinks in measure of their inward vision.

19  vid' io in essa luce altre lucerne
20  muoversi in giro più e men correnti,
21  al modo, credo, di lor viste interne.

22  From a cold cloud descended never winds,
23  Or visible or not, so rapidly
24  They would not laggard and impeded seem

22  Di fredda nube non disceser venti,
23  o visibili o no, tanto festini,
24  che non paressero impediti e lenti

25  To any one who had those lights divine
26  Seen come towards us, leaving the gyration
27  Begun at first in the high Seraphim.

25  a chi avesse quei lumi divini
26  veduti a noi venir, lasciando il giro
27  pria cominciato in li alti Serafini;

28  And behind those that most in front appeared
29  Sounded "Osanna!" so that never since
30  To hear again was I without desire.

28  e dentro a quei che più innanzi appariro
29  sonava “Osanna” sì, che unque poi
30  di rïudir non fui sanza disiro.

31  Then unto us more nearly one approached,
32  And it alone began: "We all are ready
33  Unto thy pleasure, that thou joy in us.

31  Indi si fece l'un più presso a noi
32  e solo incominciò: “Tutti sem presti
33  al tuo piacer, perché di noi ti gioi.

34  We turn around with the celestial Princes,
35  One gyre and one gyration and one thirst,
36  To whom thou in the world of old didst say,

34  Noi ci volgiam coi principi celesti
35  d'un giro e d'un girare e d'una sete,
36  ai quali tu del mondo già dicesti:

37  'Ye who, intelligent, the third heaven are moving;'
38  And are so full of love, to pleasure thee
39  A little quiet will not be less sweet."

37  'Voi che 'ntendendo il terzo ciel movete';
38  e sem sì pien d'amor, che, per piacerti,
39  non fia men dolce un poco di quïete.”

40  After these eyes of mine themselves had offered
41  Unto my Lady reverently, and she
42  Content and certain of herself had made them,

40  Poscia che li occhi miei si fuoro offerti
41  a la mia donna reverenti, ed essa
42  fatti li avea di sé contenti e certi,

43  Back to the light they turned, which so great promise
44  Made of itself, and "Say, who art thou?" was
45  My voice, imprinted with a great affection.

43  rivolsersi a la luce che promessa
44  tanto s'avea, e “Deh, chi siete?” fue
45  la voce mia di grande affetto impressa.

46  O how and how much I beheld it grow
47  With the new joy that superadded was
48  Unto its joys, as soon as I had spoken!

46  E quanta e quale vid' io lei far piùe
47  per allegrezza nova che s'accrebbe,
48  quando parlai, a l'allegrezze sue!

49  Thus changed, it said to me: "The world possessed me
50  Short time below; and, if it had been more,
51  Much evil will be which would not have been.

49  Così fatta, mi disse: “Il mondo m'ebbe
50  giù poco tempo; e se più fosse stato,
51  molto sarà di mal, che non sarebbe.

52  My gladness keepeth me concealed from thee,
53  Which rayeth round about me, and doth hide me
54  Like as a creature swathed in its own silk.

52  La mia letizia mi ti tien celato
53  che mi raggia dintorno e mi nasconde
54  quasi animal di sua seta fasciato.

55  Much didst thou love me, and thou hadst good reason;
56  For had I been below, I should have shown thee
57  Somewhat beyond the foliage of my love.

55  Assai m'amasti, e avesti ben onde;
56  che s'io fossi giù stato, io ti mostrava
57  di mio amor più oltre che le fronde.

58  That left-hand margin, which doth bathe itself
59  In Rhone, when it is mingled with the Sorgue,
60  Me for its lord awaited in due time,

58  Quella sinistra riva che si lava
59  di Rodano poi ch'è misto con Sorga,
60  per suo segnore a tempo m'aspettava,

61  And that horn of Ausonia, which is towned
62  With Bari, with Gaeta and Catona,
63  Whence Tronto and Verde in the sea disgorge.

61   e quel corno d'Ausonia che s'imborga
62  di Bari e di Gaeta e di Catona,
63 da ove Tronto e Verde in mare sgorga.

64  Already flashed upon my brow the crown
65  Of that dominion which the Danube waters
66  After the German borders it abandons;

64  Fulgeami già in fronte la corona
65  di quella terra che 'l Danubio riga
66  poi che le ripe tedesche abbandona.

67  And beautiful Trinacria, that is murky
68  'Twixt Pachino and Peloro, (on the gulf
69  Which greatest scath from Eurus doth receive,)

67  E la bella Trinacria, che caliga
68  tra Pachino e Peloro, sopra 'l golfo
69  che riceve da Euro maggior briga,

70  Not through Typhoeus, but through nascent sulphur,
71  Would have awaited her own monarchs still,
72  Through me from Charles descended and from Rudolph,

70  non per Tifeo ma per nascente solfo,
71  attesi avrebbe li suoi regi ancora,
72  nati per me di Carlo e di Ridolfo,

73  If evil lordship, that exasperates ever
74  The subject populations, had not moved
75  Palermo to the outcry of 'Death! death!'

73  se mala segnoria, che sempre accora
74  li popoli suggetti, non avesse
75  mosso Palermo a gridar: 'Mora, mora!'

76  And if my brother could but this foresee,
77  The greedy poverty of Catalonia
78  Straight would he flee, that it might not molest him;

76  E se mio frate questo antivedesse,
77  l'avara povertà di Catalogna
78  già fuggeria, perché non li offendesse;

79  For verily 'tis needful to provide,
80  Through him or other, so that on his bark
81  Already freighted no more freight be placed.

79  ché veramente proveder bisogna
80  per lui, o per altrui, sì ch'a sua barca
81  carcata più d'incarco non si pogna.

82  His nature, which from liberal covetous
83  Descended, such a soldiery would need
84  As should not care for hoarding in a chest."

82  La sua natura, che di larga parca
83  discese, avria mestier di tal milizia
84  che non curasse di mettere in arca.”

85  "Because I do believe the lofty joy
86  Thy speech infuses into me, my Lord,
87  Where every good thing doth begin and end

85  “Però ch'i' credo che l'alta letizia
86  che 'l tuo parlar m'infonde, segnor mio,
87  là 've ogne ben si termina e s'inizia,

88  Thou seest as I see it, the more grateful
89  Is it to me; and this too hold I dear,
90  That gazing upon God thou dost discern it.

88  per te si veggia come la vegg' io,
89  grata m'è più; e anco quest' ho caro
90  perché 'l discerni rimirando in Dio.

91  Glad hast thou made me; so make clear to me,
92  Since speaking thou hast stirred me up to doubt,
93  How from sweet seed can bitter issue forth."

91  Fatto m'hai lieto, e così mi fa chiaro,
92  poi che, parlando, a dubitar m'hai mosso
93  com' esser può, di dolce seme, amaro.”

94  This I to him; and he to me: "If I
95  Can show to thee a truth, to what thou askest
96  Thy face thou'lt hold as thou dost hold thy back.

94  Questo io a lui; ed elli a me: “S'io posso
95  mostrarti un vero, a quel che tu dimandi
96  terrai lo viso come tien lo dosso.

97  The Good which all the realm thou art ascending
98  Turns and contents, maketh its providence
99  To be a power within these bodies vast;

97  Lo ben che tutto il regno che tu scandi
98  volge e contenta, fa esser virtute
99  sua provedenza in questi corpi grandi.

100  And not alone the natures are foreseen
101  Within the mind that in itself is perfect,
102  But they together with their preservation.

100  E non pur le nature provedute
101  sono in la mente ch'è da sé perfetta,
102  ma esse insieme con la lor salute:

103  For whatsoever thing this bow shoots forth
104  Falls foreordained unto an end foreseen,
105  Even as a shaft directed to its mark.

103  per che quantunque quest' arco saetta
104  disposto cade a proveduto fine,
105  sì come cosa in suo segno diretta.

106  If that were not, the heaven which thou dost walk
107  Would in such manner its effects produce,
108  That they no longer would be arts, but ruins.

106  Se ciò non fosse, il ciel che tu cammine
107  producerebbe sì li suoi effetti,
108  che non sarebbero arti, ma ruine;

109  This cannot be, if the Intelligences
110  That keep these stars in motion are not maimed,
111  And maimed the First that has not made them perfect.

109  e ciò esser non può, se li 'ntelletti
110  che muovon queste stelle non son manchi,
112  e manco il primo, che non li ha perfetti.

112  Wilt thou this truth have clearer made to thee?"
113  And I: "Not so; for 'tis impossible
114  That nature tire, I see, in what is needful."

112  Vuo' tu che questo ver più ti s'imbianchi?”
113  E io “Non già; ché impossibil veggio
114  che la natura, in quel ch'è uopo, stanchi.”

115  Whence he again: "Now say, would it be worse
116  For men on earth were they not citizens?"
117  "Yes," I replied; "and here I ask no reason."

115  Ond' elli ancora: “Or dì: sarebbe il peggio
116  per l'omo in terra, se non fosse cive?”
117  “Si,” rispuos' io; “e qui ragion non cheggio.”

118  "And can they be so, if below they live not
119  Diversely unto offices diverse?
120  No, if your master writeth well for you."

118  “E puot' elli esser, se giù non si vive
119  diversamente per diversi offici?
120  Non, se 'l maestro vostro ben vi scrive.”

121  So came he with deductions to this point;
122  Then he concluded: "Therefore it behoves
123  The roots of your effects to be diverse.

121  Sì venne deducendo infino a quici;
122  poscia conchiuse: “Dunque esser diverse
123  convien di vostri effetti le radici:

124  Hence one is Solon born, another Xerxes,
125  Another Melchisedec, and another he
126  Who, flying through the air, his son did lose.

124  per ch'un nasce Solone e altro Serse,
125  altro Melchisedèch e altro quello
126  che, volando per l'aere, il figlio perse.

127  Revolving Nature, which a signet is
128  To mortal wax, doth practise well her art,
129  But not one inn distinguish from another;

127  La circular natura, ch'è suggello
128  a la cera mortal, fa ben sua arte,
129  ma non distingue l'un da l'altro ostello.

130  Thence happens it that Esau differeth
131  In seed from Jacob; and Quirinus comes
132  From sire so vile that he is given to Mars.

130  Quinci addivien ch'Esaù si diparte
131  per seme da Iacòb; e vien Quirino
132  da sì vil padre, che si rende a Marte.

133  A generated nature its own way
134  Would always make like its progenitors,
135  If Providence divine were not triumphant.

133  Natura generata il suo cammino
134  simil farebbe sempre a' generanti,
135  se non vincesse il proveder divino.

136  Now that which was behind thee is before thee;
137  But that thou know that I with thee am pleased,
138  With a corollary will I mantle thee.

136  Or quel che t'era dietro t'è davanti:
137  ma perché sappi che di te mi giova,
138  un corollario voglio che t'ammanti.

139  Evermore nature, if it fortune find
140  Discordant to it, like each other seed
141  Out of its region, maketh evil thrift;

139  Sempre natura, se fortuna trova
140  discorde a sé, com' ogne altra semente
141  fuor di sua regïon, fa mala prova.

142  And if the world below would fix its mind
143  On the foundation which is laid by nature,
144  Pursuing that, 'twould have the people good.

142  E se 'l mondo là giù ponesse mente
143  al fondamento che natura pone,
144  seguendo lui, avria buona la gente.

145  But you unto religion wrench aside
146  Him who was born to gird him with the sword,
147  And make a king of him who is for sermons;

145  Ma voi torcete a la religïone
146  tal che fia nato a cignersi la spada,
147  e fate re di tal ch'è da sermone;

148  Therefore your footsteps wander from the road."

148  onde la traccia vostra è fuor di strada.”

Canto IX
Commentators debate the question of which "bella Clemenza" the narrator is addressing to begin this canto, Charles Martel's wife or his daughter?   (Note the name, she being the clemency that we all so need as the grace we require to be absolved from our own damnable thoughts and actions.)  I vote for the wife, as married man and woman are one flesh, and this intermingling would be befitting for the sphere of Venus, but whether this person is wife or daughter, seems to me to be of less importance than the fact that whoever this person is, she stands for the reader, and as the reader or listener, the rhetorician must sweetly capture them with just such a honey trap.  This maneuver — at least for me — has great significance as we consider why this rhetorical device is so important in interpreting the very problematic text and subtexts of this canto, whose opening might be the weirdest of any of the canti in the entire poem.  Why the past tense "historical" summary of what Martel has prophesied?   Why not just have Martel continue speaking in the present tense?  And why tell Clemenza at all, since we soon will know that the lights here can read minds, why does Clemenza have to be told what Charles has said?   If the equivocal Charles has been used here because of the conditional tense of what might have been, there is a switch now to make a point of what definitely will come to pass — maybe.  It's so disorienting to the reader, which is perhaps deliberate since the reader is being put off her or his guard, softened up, so to speak, so that they will accept what the speakers in this canto are about to peddle.  What does Yeats say?  "The rhetorician would deceive his neighbors, the sentimentalist himself."  Or, since the prophecy alluded to here is one of tragic consequences, must Charles be returned to the silence of having already spoken, and is now as incapable of speech, as his youth and early death rendered him incapable of rule?   Walter Benjamin's insight seems apropos here: "Tragedy is a preliminary stage of prophesy.  It is a content, which exists only in language: what is tragic is the word and the silence of the past, in which the prophetic voice is being tried out, or suffering and death when they are redeemed by the voice ... "  The voice of Charles is absent here, its prophesy echoing from a hole in time.  It wobbles and warbles, like Steven's blackbird ... 

I do not know which to prefer,   
The beauty of inflections   
Or the beauty of innuendoes,   
The blackbird whistling   
Or just after.   

Whatever else it is or means, this opening seems a beautiful flicker at the weird boundary/not boundary of all music, and all speech, unheard until it is gone.  

 As in the previous canti of the Paradiso, Canto IX also contains a great deal of flicker and flow, but here I think it serves like the smooth flow of the somnambulist’s voice and the gadgetry that he uses as the shiny spinning objects that will induce an hypnotic trance.  After probing the ease in which we accept the presence of these lights, these living presences, as the denizens of Heaven and the blessed recipients of God's eternal grace, I look at these speakers and begin to ask myself who these souls have been, and how they could possible merit such divine favor?

Each time a speaker enters, that hypnotic effect is reiterated, along with some imprecation for the reader to consider the speaker's blessed state, and we are even warned in lines 10 - 12 that to ignore what is being said leaves us prey to vain and impious deceptions.  We are given an emotional appeal to our hearts, and told to abandon the "temple" of our heads, and should we not, perhaps we will even suffer punishment to that organ by persisting in such thinking.  No, we cannot be allowed to think.   So before that can happen, the trance is deepened by the appearance of yet another "splendor." 

There are big spheres of reference here, sometimes one growing larger and enclosing the others, and then another expands, and the former are encompassed — these all being juggled through the art of rhetoric.  A list of possible captions for these thematic spheres might be:

Change and Constancy, specifically the idea of change in eternity, i.e., difference without decay or death

Love and War (Venus and Mars, Dido and Aeneas)

Genealogies and Patronymic dynastic rights

Orthodoxy and Heresy

Justice and Retribution: Violence, pain, genocide 

Poetry and Prophesy

Political and Ecclesiastical Power

Fealty and Betrayal

Promise and Realization

Damnation and Salvation

History and Geography

Linguistic expressions and/or fundamental truths

The temperamental predilections of people, their innate tendencies and moral volitions

The list could be extended or contracted, since these are all huge, amorphous, and slippery concepts, each sphere being elastic enough to shrink or stretch as the occasion demands.  Perhaps we might even boil all this down to a single all-encompassing Venetian rubric:

The interrelationships of sex, violence, power, and spirit.

But that being said, this is one of Dante's great talents as a poet, that he is able within a narrative structure to ping just the right spot in that amorphous ovum so that it burgeons with so many areas of human thought and experience.  He's hard to excerpt, since the verses all seem to have a sort of fractal-esque quality, so that when we try to isolate one theme, we find it entangled with so many others.  

In this canto in particular, but really increasingly so, as I've moved through the Paradiso, I've had a devil of a time keeping track of the trek, with all the cross-hatching and backtracking and under and over scent trails, which mirror life about as closely as any art could, but which leave the reader in the same kind of quandaries that life itself presents, that is, what does this all mean? and more importantly, since these notes are not meant to pin down this question in any scholarly or general kind of way — what does this all mean to me NOW.  All of my readings are provisional ones, and I know full well that even if the text remains the same, it will work on me in subsequent readings so that I change my reactions to it.  The only thing that holds constant is the richness and deepening of the interaction — and how many experiences in life can offer that?   

What struck me when examining the histories of those who speak or are spoken about here is that these splendors of the saved, in their mortal lives and actions, did not much differ from those who were being punished in Hell or purged in Purgatory.  They do not talk about the manner of their deaths, or even the conduct of their lives.  But they do seem anxious to pronounce prophetic doom on their adversaries, so they can hardly be seen as forgiving guides to their own state of blessedness.  They are not heroic as are the protagonists of Greek tragedy, who die in defiance of the crushing fates enforced on them by jealous pagan gods, and who thereby assert their humanity, mortality, and above all, pain, against the onslaughts of immortal power.  They are not martyrs for truth, like Socrates, who accepted the poison of death, as a means to reject the poisoning of those eternal probings for truth which exalt the human mind.  They are not sacrifices for the atonement of their own sins or for the sins of the collective, as are Jesus and the subsequent Christian martyrs.  They sing-dance-spin in a joyous light whose single stated purpose is to give pleasure to the querent, Dante.   They are mind-reading molecules whose talk-appearance-protuberances fit exactly into the pleasure receptors of their helpless audience.  And what is this pleasure, this joy?  To prophesize the suffering and demise of their heretical enemies, to lay a curse on the wayward and the vain, to render their compatriots and even their arrogant and violent kin unto the devastation of greater violence, based somehow, not on arrogance, not even on humility, but on a pleasurable devotion.  Reading this canto, it occurred to me that even a poet of the stature of Dante has a secret part in himself which longs for the destruction of the culture that sustains him.

I must say that I find these "Lights," these "Lifes," even more disturbing in some ways than the denizens of Hell, because, I suppose, they seem so consciousless as to believe, and, make no mistake, to be amply rewarded for this belief, that their piety justifies their adulteries, their violence, and their condemnations.  They seem to have achieved the splendor and joy of righteousness, to have found in their own violence and sexual promiscuities the justification for orthodoxy that purifies their consciences, and absolves their actions and beliefs even by means of damning the very same types of actions and beliefs of those whom they hold to be heretical.  Underneath the praise, this canto seems to be camouflaging a harsher truth, namely, that the diseases of lust and power are not more potent than the disease of idealism in wreaking the social havocs of murder and torment.   Once, at the prelude of another of the endless wars we fight for resources, for belief-systems, for economic hegemony or for whatever excuse du jour we have for exercising this need for violence, during a protest, my wife carried a placard saying: We should not become the evil we deplore.  And a man walk up to her and said: "Nice sign.  But I don't agree."  Exactly.  Every type of communication — and violence is certainly a form of communication — arises from a substructure of underlying rules and assumptions, and when these forms meet and clash, the interactive domain that separates and unites them is absurd, rife with non-sequiturs, and is much like an ideal that beckons and frustrates because its main allure is the impossibility of its fulfillment.  The process is so disorienting that violence becomes a kind of return to a recognizable home, a way to use chaos to answer the challenge of what is feared to be a worse chaos.  It is a return to home base, a crazy back-stagger to an understandable blood-letting and devastation, whose syntax, vocabulary, and phonemes are pain, and whose meaning is at the dictates of those with the power to inflict pain.  I have a hard time swallowing, whatever our surface reading of this text, that Dante meant to praise the splendors here, because they were expert progenitors of pain.  What I do believe is that Poetry (with that capital P) is what he viewed as a possible — i.e., conditional — antidote, or better, a transcendence of Pain.

What kind of pain are we talking about?  The text summarizes it, but is not graphic, we have to look into historical accounts to get a picture of what actually happened in the Albigensian Crusade and in the various dynastic wars and political wrangles of the times.  And then we have to ask ourselves why adultery and kinship ties were so instrumental in fomenting these atrocities.  Note this account of the destruction of Béziers, one of the heretical Cathars' strongholds.

The camp-followers were intoxicated with success, inflamed by fanaticism and greed.  They had learned from the preachers of the crusade that the southerners were instruments of Satan, protectors of Jews, immeasurably rich.  Once they had penetrated into the streets, they rushed howling through the streets, killing all who had not had time to hide.  Appalling scenes of destruction and violence followed.  The heavily armed knights, not to be outdone in the pursuit of plunder, charged through the gates and invaded the houses, barging aside the camp-followers with cudgels and seizing valuables from their grasp.  The camp-followers, frustrated in their hopes of a rich booty, spread through the city filled with a lust for the destruction of what they could not take for themselves.  They invaded the churches and slaughtered the terrified citizens who had gathered there for safety.  Priests, women, and children were cut down indiscriminately, as they clung to reliquaries and crucifixes.  Of the crowds which had packed the cathedral and the church of the Madeleine, there was not one survivor.  As they passed through the city, the camp-followers lit brands and set fire to all the finer houses which they came upon.  The flames spread rapidly through the wooden buildings.  In the south-eastern corner of the walls the timbers of the cathedral caught fire and the high vault collapsed to entomb the bodies of the massacred citizens inside.  The work of pillage ended only towards the evening when the heat of the blazing city became intolerable and the crusaders were forced to withdraw to the meadows by the rivers.

Although it had been unplanned, the sack of Béziers was not unwelcome by the clerical leaders of the crusade.  Providence had dealt those 'disgusting dogs' their just punishment, reflected Peter of Vaux-de-Cernay.  A German monk repeated the story that Arnald-Amaury, when asked in the middle of the slaughter how the Catholics could be distinguished from the heretics, replied 'Kill them all; God will recognize his own.'

The Albigensian Crusade
Jonathan Sumption

At what point does literature become some personal foray into the very body of the reader, the words hard, foreign intruders invading the vulnerable soft tissues and fomenting those irritations that result in tumorous pearls?  We want to distract ourselves, stop reading and interest ourselves in other things, we would, to quote Melville's Bartleby: Prefer not.  As Pound said in an interview: "It is difficult to write  a Paradiso when all the superficial indications are that you ought to write an apocalypse."  Where in any age are you going to find exemplars for the blessed?  Not easy in 13th or 14th Century Europe, or, in any historical epoch West or East.  Saints are unrecognizable in any contemporary costume.  The sumptuary laws of the age disguise them.  Their naked radiance is mostly confined to legend.  Dante had his map, his geometrical and geographical form, and it seems pretty solid on the surface, but as soon as we drill down a little, it's all molten lava below this thin crust of gangue.  Maybe Dante is saying: Keep drilling, and that molten lava becomes adamant and assumes a crystalline beauty: spinning rubies here and there, and throwing off light in momentary brilliancies that belie their apparent solidity.  The image holds more of paradise than what the explanation of it ever can.  Forget explanations? no, we can't, but the questions are far more wondrous than their answers, so we ask: Why should we want to occupy our minds with this Folco, who appears here to the aspirant, Dante, as a high exemplar of serene bliss?  He is Foquet de Marseille, a famous troubadour, who began his career as a poet and concluded his life as a fierce persecutor of the victims of one of Europe's first genocides, those heretical Manicheans called the Cathars.  In that role, he did a good job, because the main news we have about the Cathar's beliefs and practices come from the orthodox Catholics, their virulent enemies, and from them we gather that the crimes of this sect were crimes of belief, not flesh.   The Cathars did not burn people or murder children or sack cities.  In fact, their leaders, the Parfaits, abhorred violence, and as once source says "We cannot but be amazed at the self-control which these ultra-pacifists displayed: despite really terrible temptation they managed to stick to their vocation in all its purity.  It was certainly neither through fear nor inertia that they chose to restrict their participation in the bloody drama of the Crusade to passive martyrdom.  Their strength, they knew, was not of this world.  As sworn foes of all violence they could only fight with spiritual weapons."  They did not thirst for martyrdom, but when it came to them to fuel human bonfires, they succumbed "with a serenity that would have shaken the faith of less fanatical adversaries, a "courage that their executioners attributed to their incredible obduracy in crime."   They were the heroes and saints of working class people and peasants, who, like them,  saw and suffered the horrors of the secular and orthodox ecclesiastical authorities.  They saw the corruption of the Church officials, endured the tyranny of princes like Cunizza's brother Ezzelino, and were fodder for the armies of those rulers, who, far from being their protectors, were their murderers and plunderers, and from these conditions, they surmised that this world was a Hell, and could not have been created by a God who was good, but rather by one who was evil, and so they postulated a duality of deities, with Satan the ruler of this World wherein the most atrocious violence and exploitations were the accepted norms.  They vituperated the flesh as a nest of corruption.  They held that the sacraments and the bought and sold indulgences and confessions of the Church were shams, since no man could relieve another of his sins.  They postulated a doctrine of reincarnation and the transmigration of souls, raised the status of women to that of equality, abjured the eating of flesh, and denied the sanctity of the cross, by holding that if Jesus were their friend and savior, it would be perverse to venerate the instrument of his execution.  They saw the rite of communion as a cannibalistic imposture.  Sexual propagation in such a world could be regarded as a crime, since it perpetuated the evils of mortality, and subjected the spirit even of infants to this world's corruption.  They certainly were not suicidal, as their enemies often claimed, since they did all in their power, except resorting to violence, to preserve themselves.  But when death came, it came as at least a temporary release from this world's sufferings.  These were the beliefs that inflamed the orthodox to genocide.  The heresy had long roots in European history and the main features of their beliefs emerged under different names and with different practices, but the gnostic ideas of this world's evil and the need of the individual to be responsible for her or his own spiritual condition seem common to them all.  Their history and their beliefs can be studied in such books as Arthur Guirdham's The Great Heresy: The History and Beliefs of the Cathars, or in Sean Martin's The Cathars: The Most Successful Heresy of the Middle Ages, or in Jean Markale's Montségur and the Mystery of the Cathars, or in Massacre at Montségur: A History of the Albigensian Crusade by Zoe Oldenbourg (quoted above).  Their fate can be traced through many, many other sources, and the story of their annihilation is numerously documented.  This heresy and its persecution exposes a number of issues lurking below the surface in this canto.  One, being the promiscuities, either for pleasure or for propagation of Cunizza’s, and the other being the sexual frustration which lies at the heart of much of the poetic tradition of the troubadours, which as Blake, centuries later pointed out, was the source of much violence in the individual and in the world.  When the lady turns cold, cruel, and refuses, the thwarted lover turns to martial acts of violence as a way to justify himself in hers and in his own eyes.  These themes of unrequitable love and the glorification of war are the métier of the troubadours' poetry, which often but thinly veils a subtext of adulterous seductions.  Here is a prose translation of a poem attributed to Folco before piety overtook him and he became a inquisitorial Bishop:

During the long and dark night,
Which is never too long for me, 
I am, despite the cold weather,
A restless watchmen over lovers' discretion,
Until the first light I stand guard to protect my friend,
Then I urge with my cry:
Beware, here comes the dawn.

The Music of the Troubadours, Vol. 1
Edited by Peter Whigham

Dawn — Alba — was a disaster for the illicit lover, in so far as it exposed his adultery, and all through the tradition, which had its own elaborate rules and forms of action and poetic expression, there is constantly a kind of torture associated with love, a dark play between denial and societally expected but condemned pleasure, a kind of sexual bizzarro world where light is dark, and darkness and secrecy are extolled and venerated along with conspiratorial assignations, and heroic violence.  Their set of virtues, if we can call them that, still survives today in the popular imagination as part of the romantic tradition that has led to such things as an angry lover calling into a radio station to say:  "This song is for Maria, I'm sorry I stabbed you."  Misogyny, frustration, violence — sex as a lever to exercise power, and love denigrated to the so-called battle of the sexes, much of this is the legacy of the courtly love tradition of the troubadours, and is the source of much great and terrible art, while ginning up a huge psychiatric industry.  It should be noted, lest the connection be in anyway obscure, that often these songs of the troubadours followed note for note the music of religious hymns.  These are the contradictions that seethed through the earthly lives of Cunizza and Folco, and these the source of the projections — as Freud would have called them — which led to the kinds of persecutions and extremes of violence of which, even the graphic words quoted above, cannot capture the full horror.  What kind of people were these blessed souls who appear in this canto, and what for them was the expression of spirit?   I find in the following quote from Walter Benjamin, a disturbing historical rhyme:

  

... spirit is the capacity to exercise dictatorship.  This capacity requires both strict inner discipline and unscrupulous external action.  Its practice brought to the world an icy disillusion which is matched in intensity only by the fierce aspiration of the will to power.  Such a conception of the perfect conduct on the part of a man of the world awakens a mood of mourning in the creature stripped of all naive  impulses.  And thus, his mood permits the paradoxical demand for saintliness ... 

The Origin of the German Tragic Drama
Walter Benjamin

I repeat, this canto's business seems to be to explore

The interrelationships of sex, violence, power, and spirit.

Accounts of Folco's life reveal him to have been a militant fanatic with a gift of persuasive rhetoric which he exploited for personal power.  He is said to have treated his Bishopric of Toulouse as his own private domain, wherein he assumed both political and ecclesiastical authority, as accounts affirm, as if he owned the place.  One of his great accomplishments was to found a gang of militant orthodox Catholics called the "White Brotherhood," whose members engaged in avowedly terrorist acts, a sort of self-sanctified mob of thugs, who like Brown Shirts or the Frei Corp went about beating, murdering, and generally fomenting civil war, all the while singing songs composed by their rascal master — perhaps a parody of the singing, dancing spirits we find in this canto.  This Folco was a real piece of work, and if you set about combing the annals of those times for a less likely candidate for the bliss in which Dante, the aspirant, finds him here, you would be hard pressed to find one ... which is why, if you know Folco's career, as Dante's contemporaries undoubtedly did, you could hardly fail to see an irony here that would make the satires of Juvenal seem like the extravagancies of praise.  Red he certainly is, but imagining his spirit burning in a crimson lake of the blood he caused to be shed is more morally palatable then seeing him spin joyfully like a ruby shining in the sun. 

This canto, ah!, the more I dug into it, the more uneasy my stomach became, and the less capable I was to delve more.  For a long time I churned, and wrote nothing.  And I still churn, but now I write too much ... and not just because of the irony, but also because another kind of message might still be gleaned here, one that is free of cynicism, free of that mood of mourning which Benjamin so aptly postulates.  What indeed is the power of devotion?  Not even discipline ... but true devotion ... devotion which saves, no matter how adulterous, or violent its expression when it burns sincerely and joyfully in the devotee's heart and mind?  Is it possible to be saved when committing the most abominable of crimes, because you have an authentic belief in their righteousness?  Or, even eschewing such unsavory ideas, could it be that the power of grace is so great that it redeems and transforms even the most heinous actions and beliefs?  Are the lights of the spirits in this canto exemplars because they never gave up their belief in this power of grace to transform?  If we have lived many lives, or lived through many lives in the life of the mind, surely we have played all roles, been victims as well as victimizers, committed all crimes, and practiced all virtues ... and if this is what underlies the power of grace to bathe us in Lethe and Eunoe, to forget everything but our bliss, to love and to take pleasure in sharing pleasure, then paradise is not a place where the scales of justice are balanced, because the whole dichotomy of justice and injustice, especially retributive justice, which is what we see throughout the Commedia as the privilege and even the duty of God, is simply irrelevant.  Grace has no conditions, it may merely be accepted.  I have to admit that these questions posed in the Commedia's Paradiso hang fire for me.  They stir up emotions  and dredge up thoughts and images more disturbing than any I encountered while reading the Purgatorio or the Inferno.  The auto-de-fay of bliss is inexplicable. 


1  Beautiful Clemence, after that thy Charles
2  Had me enlightened, he narrated to me
3  The treacheries his seed should undergo;

1  Da poi che Carlo tuo, bella Clemenza,
2  m'ebbe chiarito, mi narrò li 'nganni
3  che ricever dovea la sua semenza;

4  But said: "Be still and let the years roll round;"
5  So I can only say, that lamentation
6  Legitimate shall follow on your wrongs.

4  ma disse: “Taci e lascia muover li anni”;
5  si ch'io non posso dir se non che pianto
6  giusto verrà di retro ai vostri danni.
7  And of that holy light the life already
8  Had to the Sun which fills it turned again,
9  As to that good which for each thing sufficeth.

7  E già la vita di quel lume santo
8  rivolta s'era al Sol che la rïempie
9  come quel ben ch'a ogne cosa è tanto.
10  Ah, souls deceived, and creatures impious,
11  Who from such good do turn away your hearts,
12  Directing upon vanity your foreheads!

10  Ahi anime ingannate e fatture empie,
11  che da sì fatto ben torcete i cuori,
12  drizzando in vanità le vostre tempie!
13  And now, behold, another of those splendours
14  Approached me, and its will to pleasure me
15  It signified by brightening outwardly.

13  Ed ecco un altro di quelli splendori
14  ver' me si fece, e 'l suo voler piacermi
15  significava nel chiarir di fori.
16  The eyes of Beatrice, that fastened were
17  Upon me, as before, of dear assent
18  To my desire assurance gave to me.

16  Li occhi di Bëatrice, ch'eran fermi
17  sovra me, come pria, di caro assenso
18  al mio disio certificato fermi.
19  "Ah, bring swift compensation to my wish,
20  Thou blessed spirit," I said, "and give me proof
21  That what I think in thee I can reflect!"

19  “Deh, metti al mio voler tosto compenso,
20  beato spirto,” dissi, “e fammi prova
21  ch'i' possa in te refletter quel ch'io penso!”
22  Whereat the light, that still was new to me,
23  Out of its depths, whence it before was singing,
24  As one delighted to do good, continued:

22  Onde la luce che m'era ancor nova,
23  del suo profondo, ond' ella pria cantava,
24  seguette come a cui di ben far giova:
25  "Within that region of the land depraved
26  Of Italy, that lies between Rialto
27  And fountain-heads of Brenta and of Piava,

25  “In quella parte de la terra prava
26  italica che siede tra Rïalto
27  e le fontane di Brenta e di Piava,
28  Rises a hill, and mounts not very high,
29  Wherefrom descended formerly a torch
30  That made upon that region great assault.

28  si leva un colle, e non surge molt' alto,
29  là onde scese già una facella
30  che fece a la contrada un grande assalto.

31  Out of one root were born both I and it;
32  Cunizza was I called, and here I shine
33  Because the splendour of this star o'ercame me.

31  D'una radice nacqui e io ed ella:
32  Cunizza fui chiamata, e qui refulgo
33  perché mi vinse il lume d'esta stella;

34  But gladly to myself the cause I pardon
35  Of my allotment, and it does not grieve me;
36  Which would perhaps seem strong unto your vulgar.

34  ma lietamente a me medesma indulgo
35  la cagion di mia sorte, e non mi noia;
36  che parria forse forte al vostro vulgo.

37  Of this so luculent and precious jewel,
38  Which of our heaven is nearest unto me,
39  Great fame remained; and ere it die away

37  Di questa luculenta e cara gioia
38  del nostro cielo che più m'è propinqua,
39  grande fama rimase; e pria che moia,

40  This hundredth year shall yet quintupled be.
41  See if man ought to make him excellent,
42  So that another life the first may leave!

40  questo centesimo anno ancor s'incinqua:
41  vedi se far si dee l'omo eccellente,
42  sì ch'altra vita la prima relinqua.

43  And thus thinks not the present multitude
44  Shut in by Adige and Tagliamento,
45  Nor yet for being scourged is penitent.

43  E ciò non pensa la turba presente
44  che Tagliamento e Adice richiude,
45  né per esser battuta ancor si pente;

46  But soon 'twill be that Padua in the marsh
47  Will change the water that Vicenza bathes,
48  Because the folk are stubborn against duty;

46  ma tosto fia che Padova al palude
47  cangerà l'acqua che Vincenza bagna,
48  per essere al dover le genti crude;

49  And where the Sile and Cagnano join
50  One lordeth it, and goes with lofty head,
51  For catching whom e'en now the net is making.

49  e dove Sile e Cagnan s'accompagna,
50  tal signoreggia e va con la testa alta,
51  che già per lui carpir si fa la ragna.

52  Feltro moreover of her impious pastor
53  Shall weep the crime, which shall so monstrous be
54  That for the like none ever entered Malta.

52  Piangerà Feltro ancora la difalta
53  de l'empio suo pastor, che sarà sconcia
54  sì, che per simil non s'entrò in malta.

55  Ample exceedingly would be the vat
56  That of the Ferrarese could hold the blood,
57  And weary who should weigh it ounce by ounce,

55  Troppo sarebbe larga la bigoncia
56  che ricevesse il sangue ferrarese,
57  e stanco chi 'l pesasse a oncia a oncia,

58  Of which this courteous priest shall make a gift
59  To show himself a partisan; and such gifts
60  Will to the living of the land conform.

58  che donerà questo prete cortese
59  per mostrarsi di parte; e cotai doni
60  conformi fieno al viver del paese.

61  Above us there are mirrors, Thrones you call them,
62  From which shines out on us God Judicant,
63  So that this utterance seems good to us."

61  Sù sono specchi, voi dicete Troni,
62  onde refulge a noi Dio giudicante;
63  sì che questi parlar ne paion buoni.”

64  Here it was silent, and it had the semblance
65  Of being turned elsewhither, by the wheel
66  On which it entered as it was before.

64  Qui si tacette; e fecemi sembiante
65  che fosse ad altro volta, per la rota
66  in che si mise com' era davante.

67  The other joy, already known to me,
68  Became a thing transplendent in my sight,
69  As a fine ruby smitten by the sun.

67  L'altra letizia, che m'era già nota
68  per cara cosa, mi si fece in vista
69  qual fin balasso in che lo sol percuota.

70  Through joy effulgence is acquired above,
71  As here a smile; but down below, the shade
72  Outwardly darkens, as the mind is sad.

70  Per letiziar là sù fulgor s'acquista,
71  sì come riso qui; ma giù s'abbuia
72  l'ombra di fuor, come la mente è trista.

73  "God seeth all things, and in Him, blest spirit,
74  Thy sight is," said I, "so that never will
75  Of his can possibly from thee be hidden;

73  “Dio vede tutto, e tuo veder s'inluia,”
74  diss' io, “beato spirto, sì che nulla
75  voglia di sé a te puot' esser fuia.

76  Thy voice, then, that for ever makes the heavens
77  Glad, with the singing of those holy fires
78  Which of their six wings make themselves a cowl,

76  Dunque la voce tua, che 'l ciel trastulla
77  sempre col canto di quei fuochi pii
78  che di sei ali facen la coculla,

79  Wherefore does it not satisfy my longings?
80  Indeed, I would not wait thy questioning
81  If I in thee were as thou art in me."

79  perché non satisface a' miei disii?
80  Già non attendere' io tua dimanda,
81  s'io m'intuassi, come tu t'inmii.”

82  "The greatest of the valleys where the water
83  Expands itself," forthwith its words began,
84  "That sea excepted which the earth engarlands,

82  “La maggior valle in che l'acqua si spanda,”
83  incominciaro allor le sue parole,
84  “fuor di quel mar che la terra inghirlanda,

85  Between discordant shores against the sun
86  Extends so far, that it meridian makes
87  Where it was wont before to make the horizon.

85  tra ' discordanti liti contra 'l sole
86  tanto sen va, che fa meridïano
87  là dove l'orizzonte pria far suole.

88  I was a dweller on that valley's shore
89  'Twixt Ebro and Magra that with journey short
90  Doth from the Tuscan part the Genoese.

88  Di quella valle fu' io litorano
89  tra Ebro e Macra, che per cammin corto
90  parte lo Genovese dal Toscano.

91  With the same sunset and same sunrise nearly
92  Sit Buggia and the city whence I was,
93  That with its blood once made the harbour hot.

91  Ad un occaso quasi e ad un orto
92  Buggea siede e la terra ond' io fui,
93  che fé del sangue suo già caldo il porto.

94  Folco that people called me unto whom
95  My name was known; and now with me this heaven
96  Imprints itself, as I did once with it;

94  Folco mi disse quella gente a cui
95  fu noto il nome mio; e questo cielo
96  di me s'imprenta, com' io fe' di lui;

97  For more the daughter of Belus never burned,
98  Offending both Sichaeus and Creusa,
99  Than I, so long as it became my locks,

97  ché più non arse la figlia di Belo,
98  noiando e a Sicheo e a Creusa,
99  di me, infin che si convenne al pelo;

100  Nor yet that Rodophean, who deluded
101  was by Demophoon, nor yet Alcides,
102  When Iole he in his heart had locked.

100  né quella Rodopëa che delusa
101  fu da Demofoonte, né Alcide
102  quando Iole nel core ebbe rinchiusa.

103  Yet here is no repenting, but we smile,
104  Not at the fault, which comes not back to mind,
105  But at the power which ordered and foresaw.

103  Non però qui si pente, ma si ride,
104  non de la colpa, ch'a mente non torna,
105  ma del valor ch'ordinò e provide.

106  Here we behold the art that doth adorn
107  With such affection, and the good discover
108  Whereby the world above turns that below.

106  Qui si rimira ne l'arte ch'addorna
107  cotanto affetto, e discernesi 'l bene
108  per che 'l mondo di sù quel di giù torna.

109  But that thou wholly satisfied mayst bear
110  Thy wishes hence which in this sphere are born,
111  Still farther to proceed behoveth me.

109  Ma perché tutte le tue voglie piene
110  ten porti che son nate in questa spera,
111  procedere ancor oltre mi convene.

112  Thou fain wouldst know who is within this light
113  That here beside me thus is scintillating,
114  Even as a sunbeam in the limpid water.

112  Tu vuo' saper chi è in questa lumera
113  che qui appresso me così scintilla
114  come raggio di sole in acqua mera.

115  Then know thou, that within there is at rest
116  Rahab, and being to our order joined,
117  With her in its supremest grade 'tis sealed.

115  Or sappi che là entro si tranquilla
116  Raab; e a nostr' ordine congiunta,
117  di lei nel sommo grado si sigilla.

118  Into this heaven, where ends the shadowy cone
119  Cast by your world, before all other souls
120  First of Christ's triumph was she taken up.

118  Da questo cielo, in cui l'ombra s'appunta
119  che 'l vostro mondo face, pria ch'altr' alma
120  del trïunfo di Cristo fu assunta.

121  Full meet it was to leave her in some heaven,
122  Even as a palm of the high victory
123  Which he acquired with one palm and the other,

121  Ben si convenne lei lasciar per palma
122  in alcun cielo de l'alta vittoria
123  che s'acquistò con l'una e l'altra palma,

124  Because she favoured the first glorious deed
125  Of Joshua upon the Holy Land,
126  That little stirs the memory of the Pope.

124  perch' ella favorò la prima gloria
125  di Iosüè in su la Terra Santa,
126  che poco tocca al papa la memoria.

127  Thy city, which an offshoot is of him
128  Who first upon his Maker turned his back,
129  And whose ambition is so sorely wept,

127  La tua città, che di colui è pianta
128  che pria volse le spalle al suo fattore
129  e di cui è la 'nvidia tanto pianta,

130  Brings forth and scatters the accursed flower
131  Which both the sheep and lambs hath led astray
132  Since it has turned the shepherd to a wolf.

130  produce e spande il maladetto fiore
131  c'ha disvïate le pecore e li agni,
132 però che fatto ha lupo del pastore.

133  For this the Evangel and the mighty Doctors
134  Are derelict, and only the Decretals
135  So studied that it shows upon their margins.

133  Per questo l'Evangelio e i dottor magni
134  son derelitti, e solo ai Decretali
135  si studia, sì che pare a' lor vivagni.

136  On this are Pope and Cardinals intent;
137  Their meditations reach not Nazareth,
138  There where his pinions Gabriel unfolded;

136  A questo intende il papa e ' cardinali;
137  non vanno i lor pensieri a Nazarette,
138  là dove Gabrïello aperse l'ali.

139  But Vatican and the other parts elect
140  Of Rome, which have a cemetery been
141  Unto the soldiery that followed Peter

139  Ma Vaticano e l'altre parti elette
140  di Roma che son state cimitero
141  a la milizia che Pietro seguette,

142  Shall soon be free from this adultery."

142  tosto libere fien de l'avoltero.”

Canto X
The heaven of the Sun may be compared to Arithmetic because of two properties: one is that all the other stars are informed by its light; the other is that the eye cannot look at it.  And these two properties are found in Arithmetic: for by its light all sciences are illuminated, because all their subjects are considered under some numerical aspect, and in considering them we always proceed by number.  For example, in Natural Science, the subject is a body in motion, which body in motion has in itself the principle of continuity, and this has in itself the principle of infinite number; and its foremost consideration is to consider the principles of natural things, which are three–namely matter, privation, and form–in which we perceive this numerical aspect.  Number exists not only in all of them together, but also, upon careful reflection, in each one individually; for this reason Pythagoras, as Aristotle says in the first book of the Physics, laid down even and odd as the principles of natural things, considering all things to have numerical aspect.  The other property of the Sun is also seen in number, of which Arithmetic is the science: the eye of the intellect cannot look upon it, because number insofar as it is considered in itself is infinite, and this we cannot comprehend.

Convivio, Book II, Chapter xiii

94  Of the lambs was I of the holy flock
95  Which Dominic conducteth by a road
96  Where well one fattens if he strayeth not.

94  Io fui de li agni de la santa greggia
95  che Domenico mena per cammino
96  u' ben s'impingua se non si vaneggia.

Paradiso, Canto 10

Before beginning to think about Paradiso Canto 10, I want to at first point out, and then put aside for future reference, as Dante himself did, this passage regarding the fattening of lambs.  Here, lambs are perhaps fattened by wisdom or a piety which leads to wisdom, but we all know why lambs are fattened, that is, for slaughter.  We are exhorted to fill ourselves with such wisdom, although the road leads, as it did for Jesus in the temporal world, to crucifixion.  If we delve into the constellation of sheep metaphors which occur throughout the Gospels, and the scriptures in general, but especially in Revelations: the lost sheep, the lamb of God, the prodigal son's homecoming feast, the division of sheep and goats at the apotheosis, we find what we find here, a profoundly unsettling use of language which, in one phrase, contains both a positive and negative emotional pole, so that however much we might like to be fattened or fulfilled by our reading, the sinister undercurrent of the extreme return to the poverty of death lurks just beneath that fulfilling abundance, the emptiness, feeding on fulness, and as we shall see in the next canto, with the long exposition on St. Francis’s marriage with Lady Poverty, the fulness fattening on emptiness.  This seems to be a conundrum that cannot be gainsaid even in paradise, and yet, in this canto, with its arithmetical substructure of order ... well, I think we have reached the very portal here which leads to a higher dimension, since whatever that conundrum is, it seems to be foundational in the construction of any temporal reality whose components are three dimensions of space and one of time.  Dante's audaciousness here is to go beyond that reality, and to create a structure of language which enables himself and his readers to likewise transcend it ... but, how?  how?  Digressions digress and we become entangled in disordered thoughts and feelings, just as we catch a glimpse of this higher dimension's order.

We cannot perceive disorder, because a very complex order of physiology, sensory interpretation, and ideational selection and/or projection must already be present for any act of perception or thought to take place.  Now, we might be able to "create" disorder, say, by means of an atomic explosion, but to manage such an enormity would require an highly ordered process of invention, planning, and execution — so that even in such an extreme case of violence, an ordered procedure would be necessary even to create chaos, and if we should survive such, it would only be by means of a highly ordered process.  Before we get into the arithmetical expression of that order, we need to realize that whether we contemplate this order or we use our own senses and intellect, which are but products of this order to stray away from this essential contemplation, that this process has been the subject of the entire Commedia, with its three realms and terza rima form.  God, as we are told in this canto, never allows his love nor his attention to be diverted from the manifestation of His three part order.  But as we have seen throughout the Inferno, the Purgatorio, and even in the Paradiso up to this point, the spirits, to the degree in which they suffer or are blessed, attend lovingly to this trinity, forget it, or deny it.  God never forgets them, but they forget God, and to the extent that they do so, or as we are reminded as readers, in direct address in this canto, the extent that we do so, and the manner in which we do so, is the precise degree in which we suffer.  God is this trinity, this order, and to allow ourselves to use our God-given senses and reason ( a most important aspect of our contemplation, when the senses are overwhelmed by splendor) to stray from this contemplation is to not only forget God but also to forget our own essence, the purpose of our birth and our life, and finally, our destiny.  To contemplate this trinity is to contemplate Sophia, who is wisdom, the son, and the sun.  It is to taste the divine.  Why taste?  A question that begs to be addressed, as we contemplate this canto ... but that issue will have to wait, while we contemplate the 12, the crown, the circle, the sun, and, finally, Time in its east to west processional and west to east precessional.  In various ways, the 12 spirits we encounter here exemplify by their works and their lives, that, like God, they made their focus a devotion to and a contemplation of the wisdom embodied in this order.  Dante, in spite of his rapture, never forgets reason, but here reason is ratio, an arithmetical order.  As to the subject of "taste," we could say that taste is the ephemera of food, our physical nourishment, and as such it represents, as do numbers, a metaphysical nourishment.  But as we shall see, Dante, uses metaphors for all the senses as they lead us beyond themselves to spirit.  But here, the senses are just signposts on the way to something else.  What that something else is dazzles beyond the grasp of the senses and even the ordinary use of poetic language.  That something else is the essence of this canto. 

Yesterday, January 6th, 2021, the Feast of the Epiphany, and my daughter's birthday, the United States' capitol was breached by a mob of racists incited to violence by the sitting president.  Their goal was not a protest to address a grievance, or change a law, or a policy, their goal, as is that of all people who cannot muster the intelligence to create or maintain order in their own lives, was therefor to subvert it.  That such events, that such people, are the lowest denizens of any kind of social order in any historical period that you may choose seems to be a permanent feature of civilization, a permanent substructure of the temporal human condition.  By lowest, here, I do not mean people without social position or power, I mean people whose moral sense is both violent and chaotic.  If you have the leisure to read this or to read Dante, you probably are at the periphery of these expressions of violent chaos — which is not to be confused with creative ferment — and if so, you probably have but a superficial notion of what Dante personally experienced in his own exile from Florence and the imposition of a death sentence should he return.  The emotional thrust of the entire Commedia has been to bring the ideal of Divine Justice into a temporal realm, because Justice is that which puts a curb on violence and chaos by means of a universal code of fairness under the law.  And as Dante's work shows, with its popes and kings in Hell, Divine Justice operates much like what in Eastern religions acts like the law of Karma, the harm that you do returns in kind as harm that you too must suffer.  But the questions are: What is Justice? and does Justice itself by its very premises of balance and fairness, nevertheless carry the seeds of violence and chaos in the operations of its law.  Is God cruel?  Is the universe cruel?  In Canto IX of the Paradiso we saw the so called blessèd souls of people whose earthly crimes were as heinous, or even more heinous, than those they persecuted.  All through the first two canticles of the Commedia, and even through paradise up to this point, violence, pain, and chaos as well as the mental and emotional states of vengeance and retribution, which subject the soul to violence, pain, and chaos, have been paramount.  But here, in Canto 10 of the Paradiso, all that has suddenly (I should say "atemporally") changed.  We might even say that up to this point we have only been in the anteroom of Paradise, but now we enter into Paradise proper.  Here order reigns, and there is no need for retribution, vengeance, violence or chaos to punish or rectify injustice.  This is one of the most remarkable attributes of Dante and his Commedia, that this poet, this poem, which have expressed so well and with such a sense of ordered creativity the issue of Justice, now is able to rise above the very foundations of  its reason for being.  If we are to believe in the diachronic nature of this poem, that there is always an aspirant learning inside the poem as its protagonist, and always a poet, outside the poem, who has already transcended this deepest and most profound issue, then we have arrived here at the first seed of the poet's inspiration, the condition which his meeting with Beatrice foreshadowed and which was the experience of love described in the Vita Nuova.  We have arrived at this maturation point, where even Beatrice is forgotten.  In this stage of the poem's flight, the earlier stages have been jettisoned.  They were necessary in their way so that the poem could achieve "escape velocity," but now they are not needed nor is the subject of Justice as a system of violence and retribution even mentioned.  In the sphere of the sun, we are in a new world.  And where is this world?  Dante is precise, this world is entered through a portal at the very place where the sun's daily east to west movement, like the meshing of the gears of a clock, connects with the Zodiacal west to east precession.  Blake says, "Eternity is in love with the productions of time," and in other insights, that "all the Great/ events of Time start forth & are conceived in such a Period/Within a Moment: a Pulsation of the Artery." or "There is a Moment in each Day that Satan cannot find/Nor can his Watch Fiends find it, but the Industrious find/This Moment & it multiply. & when it once is found/ It renovates every Moment of the Day if rightly placed."  THis moment is the wormhole that the Commedia in this canto has found.  This is the place where the truths of the text are like jewels which would become paste if they were ever to leave the domain in which their true value shines.  The ineffability theme is reiterated here, but I think that what Dante is saying that if we switch our attention from ordinary linguistic structures, which cannot directly convey the true sense of this Divine Order, we can nevertheless point to an arithmetical and geometric order that does indeed reveal this expression of the Divine when it shines through as the substructure of those linguistic expressions.

I don't want to imply here that there is some universal truth or absolute interpretation that reveals for every reader the layers of order in this text.  I don't even want to assert that the order of this text will be the same for me at another reading.  But I do want to at least hint at a way of reading that is flirtatious (as the language in this canto implies), and self-transforming.
We are veiwing another dimension of reality from a lower dimension, and like flatlanders in a two-dimensional world, the appearance of three-dimensional entities for us will appear as anomolies, or even absurdities, and will be immediately interpreted as a part of the world we know.  So unsettling are the intrusions of these anomolies that our ordinary consciousness will have what amounts to an immune system response, and their threat will be attacked and expunged as much as is possible.  But just imagine this possibility.  The 12 spirits here are arranged in a crown-like shape, each spirit occupying a numbered place in the clock face, and as we proceed in the circle, as Dante instructs us to do, we return to a place where the orthodox Thomas Aquinus is standing next to the heretical Siger, the opposites juxtaposed, and no longer in opposition in any geometrical sense.  Now let's do another operation.  Let's draw lines through the center of the circle and connect the opposites numbers, then add the 6 totals.  12 + 6 would be 18, 1 + 7 would be 8, 2 + 8 would be 10, 3 + 9 would be 12, 4 + 10 would be 14, 5 + 11 would be 16.  Now add these totals: 18, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16.  The answer is 78, and 7 + 8 is 15, and 1 + 5 is  6, the trinity doubled.  You can also arrive at the 6 by doing what numerologists do, which is reducing by addition all mulitiple digit numbers to a single digit.  It we do that, we get a sequence of 9,8,1,3,5,7, the total being 33, and adding 3 + 3 again we get 6, the trinity doubled.  6 is the smallest perfect number, the first positive integer that is equal to the sum of its proper divisors, the sum of 1,2, and 3.  What we have here is the revelation of an underlying order, and when we return to Dante's exposition wherein he allegorically relates the order of the sun to the subject of arithmetic, to number, then this underlying order relates to the subject of the trinity, in what may be an arbitrary interpretation, but it is nevertheless the kind of interpretation that lies beyond the grasp of the senses (all of which Dante is carefull to ennumerate in his various transmutations of metaphors throughout this canto) an interpretation which is only perceivable through the MIND, and an interpretation which dazzles the mind.  I could not find the exact quote (but have listed below several quotes pertaining1) where Jung says something like this: Numbers come into play when the unconscious is most in need of subduing its own chaotic irrationality.  An exercise like the ones demonstrated above is an irrational application of rational law to discover the order lying at the heart of disorder, the ratio at the heart of the irrational.  This irrational ordering power is the trinity: matter, privation, and form, all this being the three-fold entity which is LOVE.  All this language of the senses, this language, quite frankly, of eroticism, of an almost naive and childish kind, is what arithmatic's ordering procedures reveal as that ordering MIND which the 12 scribes of God here exemplify, a love of Sophia, wisdom, not merely in linguistic philosophical proofs, but in Pythagorian allegories.  It seems as if what this canto is saying is that however shifting and strange, however violent and chaotic is the temporal world of personalities, nature, and politics, whenever and wherever we probe deeply enough, we find Divine Order.  The discovery of this truth about order/chaos/love/eroticism, spiritual inception and maturity culminates in this sphere of the sun, where God is described as finding unending delight in making, reciting, and permutating the meanings of this poem of His/Her Creation.

Certainly other numbers are at play in this arithmetical canto.  But the one that draws my attention here, as it did Dante's contemporaries, is the number 5, the number assigned to Solomon, who is here described as

109  The fifth light, that among us is the fairest,
110  Breathes forth from such a love, that all the world
111  Below is greedy to learn tidings of it.

109  La quinta luce, ch'è tra noi più bella,
110  spira di tale amor, che tutto 'l mondo
111  là giù ne gola di saper novella:

112  Within it is the lofty mind, where knowledge
113  So deep was put, that, if the true be true,
114  To see so much there never rose a second.

112  entro v'è l'alta mente u' sì profondo
113  saver fu messo, che, se 'l vero è vero,
114  a veder tanto non surse il secondo.

In Dante's time, whether or not Solomon was saved was a hot issue.  Partly because he succumbed to idolatry, but mainly because of his prolific sexual indulgences.  There is certainly a hint here, especially when we combine these verses with other flirtatious language in the canto that Solomon's wisdom did not come about in spite of his carnal knowledge, but because  of it.  In Sanskrit plays, there is a movement towards something called rasa — peace, serenity, the feeling of oneness arising from a sense of wholeness.  Rasa is a single, ineffable, transcendental joy, and these most ancient examples of theater move towards achieving rasa and experiencing, at least for a moment, a dispassionate delight in the essence of an impersonal emotion.  But to arrive at this state, all the plays begin with desire, affection, and erotic longing, and from there work through various states of giddiness, cynicism, scorn, anger, sadness, pride, fear, aversion, and wonder.  Something like this seems to be occurring here, through a reference to the works of Solomon as another scribe of God.  His is a soul that has been made beautiful and wise by its passage through the flames of eroticism (See Great Sanskrit Plays in Modern Translation, P. Lal).  Solomon is the number 5.  Curiously, if we add the two erotic figures in the center of the circle of 12, we come to a total of 14, added together 5.  5 is the center of all the simple numbers, 1 - 9 — and we know how important the 9 is in Dante's arithmetical cosmology, starting with the fact that he and Beatrice were both 9 years old when they first met.  Thus, 5 is the heart, and this heart can be seen in the following two configurations wherein 5 occupies both center positions.

1   2   3
4   5   6
7   8   9

    or

1   4   7
2   5   8
3   6   9

Any reader with the tenacity for playing such games could probably find many more examples as equally quixotic and trivial as they are fundamental and perhaps profound.  But what occurs to me is that all through these first cantos of the Paradiso, Dante has been looking for ways to describe difference without decay or death or diabolic heresies incompatible with divine unity.  In these allegories of arithmetic, he may have found the wisdom which accomplishes just that.
 
We are in Canto 10 of the Paradiso.  Why this revelation of the trinity and numbers in Canto 10?  Because 10 is the God of Numbers.  Consider, reader, irrational reader, the following penultimate passage from The Meaning and Philosophy of Numbers by Leonard Bosman:

That this number 10 represents Completion and Perfection is also shown by the fact that it is the complete and final number, all others being evolved from it, or from its components.  All numbers are built up from the primordial one, two, and three, and the first step from this trinity, the junction of one and three, gives four, and from these all numbers originate, there total being ten.  Without a manifested trinity of numbers, nothing can be produced, for 1 + 2 = 3, 3 + 1 = 4, 3 + 2 = 5, 3 + 2 + 1 = 6, 4 + 3 = 7, 4 + 3 + 1 = 8, 3 + 3 + 4 = 9, 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 = 10.  Beyond this all is repetition and multiplication.  Hence 10 is rightly named the perfect number, for all numbers subsist therein.

If one is left cold by this possibility that Dante was quite serious about this transference of erotic desire to an armature of abstract numbers, I would very much like to agree.  And it may seem quite ridiculous to assert such a thing.  But a genius of the magnitude of Dante has a way of making interpreters look ridiculous, and if you're going to commit yourself to the serious (but not earnest) task of reading him, you have to be willing to play the fool from time to time as a token of devotion.  That said, I have more than a sneaking suspicion that something like this transference of the sexual to the spiritual, of the intellect to love is actually one of Dante's intents.  The argument that it is his intent — and that there is scriptural and historical support for just such a transference — is ably put forth by Robert Hollander in his commentary on this canto.

Dante, having conflated love and intellect, at least by the opening of this canto, can use the vocabularies interchangeably, or substitute the former for the latter, as he does here. Psychologists refer to another version of this process as sublimation, an attempt to skirt a painful awareness of sexual desire by replacing it with a more “acceptable” activity.  In Jesus' teaching (e.g., the wise virgins preparing for the arrival of the bridegroom [Matth. 25:1-13]) we can see a more positive sense of sexuality, if it is also simultaneously seen as the basis for its own supersession, taking carnal pleasure past its physical expression and its physical limits. E.g., “If you enjoy the thought of consummating a marriage, oh, will you enjoy the kingdom of Heaven!”  It would seem likely that Dante's transposition of terms generally associated with sexual desire to descriptions of the longing for God, as innovative as it may seem to be, is in fact a continuation of a highly similar practice in Jesus' teaching, as it is found with some frequency in the Gospels.
   
1  1. There is no reason why whole numbers possess certain meanings or qualities, and no reason why elephants or men should exist.  These arrangements are simply there as given facts, like the crystalline systems or the discontinuities of physics, even as the whole of creation is a “just-so story.”  ~Carl Jung, Letters Vol. II, Page 355.

2. I have got stuck, on the one hand, in the acausality (or “synchronicity”) of certain phenomena of unconscious provenance and, on the other hand, in the qualitative statements of numbers, for here I set foot on territories where I cannot advance without the help and understanding of the other disciplines. ~Carl Jung, Letters Vol. II, Pages 351-352.

3. Like all the inner foundations of judgment, numbers are archetypal by nature and consequently partake of the psychic qualities of the archetype. ~Carl Jung, Letters Vol. II, Pages 327-329.

4. It would be a worthy task for a mathematician to collect all the known properties of numbers and also all their “inescapable” statements which should be quite possible up to 10 — and in this way project a biological picture of whole numbers. ~Carl Jung, Letters Vol. II, Pages 327-329.

5. It is a mathematical structure, which first made me hit on the idea that the unconscious somehow avails itself of the properties of whole numbers. ~Carl Jung, Letters Vol. II, Pages 327-329.

6. From this it appears that whole numbers are individuals, and that they Possess properties which cannot be explained on the assumption that they are multiple units. ~Carl Jung, Letters Vol. II, Pages 327-329.

7. The idea that numbers were invented for counting is obviously untenable, since they are not only pre-existent to judgment but possess properties which were discovered only in the course of the centuries, and presumably possess a number of others which will be brought to light only by the future development of mathematics. ~Carl Jung, Letters Vol. II, Pages 327-329.

8. The fact is that the numbers pre-existing in nature are presumably the most fundamental archetypes, being the very matrix of all others. ~Carl Jung, Letters Vol. II, Pages 325-327.

9. Archetypes are not mere concepts but are entities, exactly like whole numbers, which are not merely aids to counting but possess irrational qualities that do not result from the concept of counting, as for instance the prime numbers and their behavior. ~Carl Jung, Letters Vol. II, Page 22.

10. Hence the mathematician Kronecker could say: Man created mathematics, but God created whole numbers. ~Carl Jung, Letters Vol. II, Page 23.

11. Where numbers indicate a measure we move into the material.  A concrete image is a manifestation requiring space in which the spirit clothes itself in the material in order to draw to man. ~Carl Jung, Jung-Ostrowski, Page 60.

12. Images and numbers are doors through which the spiritual can reach man. ~Carl Jung, Jung-Ostrowski, Page 60.

13. It is characteristic of the transcendent that it can be pictured and described by numbers; the passage of time, quantity, and identity, are spiritual substances. ~Carl Jung, Jung-Ostrowski, Page 60.

14. The character of the image is not determined by numbers.  Pure spiritual substance is eternal.  An image as such needs neither time nor space. ~Carl Jung, Jung-Ostrowski, Page 60.

15. I should like to study the theory of numbers.  What is a number, an entity, a sequence, an archetype?  We think we can perceive and grasp a number logically and suddenly it behaves quite differently from the way we expected. ~Carl Jung, Jung-Ostrowski, Page 55.

16. It is a fundamental phenomenon of mathematics that numbers are not just mathematical entities but individualities. ~Carl Jung, Jung-Ostrowski, Page 55.

17. We believe we are playing with equations and suddenly it transpires that certain equations express the laws of electric currents.  God played and formulated currents. ~Carl Jung, Jung-Ostrowski, Page 55.

18. Do not forget that the original meaning of all letters and numbers was a magical one!  Hence the “perils of the soul.” ~Carl Jung, Letters Vol. 1, Pages 528-529.

19. Numbers are autonomous. They had their life, their significance before men used them as instruments.  The mathematicians continue to use them as instruments, so in that instant they become dry.  Before they had their proper significance. C. G. Jung, Emma Jung and Toni Wolff – A Collection of Remembrances; Pages 51-70.

20.  … number and synchronicity… were… always brought into connection with one another,… both possess numinosity and mystery as their common characteristics.  Number has invariably been used to characterize some numinous object, and all numbers from 1 to 9 are ‘sacred,’ just as 10, 12, 13, 14, 28, 32, and 40 have a special significance. ~Carl Jung, CW 8, Para 870.

21. The very numbers you use in counting are more than you take them for. They are at the same time mythological entities (for the Pythagoreans they were even divine), but you are certainly unaware of this when you use numbers for a practical purpose. ~Carl Jung, CW 18, Para 461

(The sum of the sequence of numbers, 1 through 21 is 231, the sum of 2, 3, 1 is 6, the trinity doubled.  21 itself is a trinity.)



1  Looking into his Son with all the Love
2  Which each of them eternally breathes forth,
3  The Primal and unutterable Power

1  Guardando nel suo Figlio con l'Amore
2  che l'uno e l'altro etternalmente spira,
3  lo primo e ineffabile Valore

4  Whate'er before the mind or eye revolves
5  With so much order made, there can be none
6  Who this beholds without enjoying Him.

4  quanto per mente e per loco si gira
5  con tant' ordine fé, ch'esser non puote
6  sanza gustar di lui chi ciò rimira.

7  Lift up then, Reader, to the lofty wheels
8  With me thy vision straight unto that part
9  Where the one motion on the other strikes,

7  Leva dunque, lettore, a l'alte rote
8  meco la vista, dritto a quella parte
9  dove l'un moto e l'altro si percuote;

10  And there begin to contemplate with joy
11  That Master's art, who in himself so loves it
12  That never doth his eye depart therefrom.

10  e lì comincia a vagheggiar ne l'arte
11  di quel maestro che dentro a sé l'ama,
12  tanto che mai da lei l'occhio non parte.

13  Behold how from that point goes branching off
14  The oblique circle, which conveys the planets,
15  To satisfy the world that calls upon them;

13  Vedi come da indi si dirama
14  l'oblico cerchio che i pianeti porta,
15  per sodisfare al mondo che li chiama.

16  And if their pathway were not thus inflected,
17  Much virtue in the heavens would be in vain,
18  And almost every power below here dead.

16  Che se la strada lor non fosse torta,
17  molta virtù nel ciel sarebbe in vano,
18  e quasi ogne potenza qua giù morta;

19  If from the straight line distant more or less
20  Were the departure, much would wanting be
21  Above and underneath of mundane order.

19  e se dal dritto più o men lontano
20  fosse 'l partire, assai sarebbe manco
21  e giù e sù de l'ordine mondano.

22  Remain now, Reader, still upon thy bench,
23  In thought pursuing that which is foretasted,
24  If thou wouldst jocund be instead of weary.

22  Or ti riman, lettor, sovra 'l tuo banco,
23  dietro pensando a ciò che si preliba,
24  s'esser vuoi lieto assai prima che stanco.

25  I've set before thee; henceforth feed thyself,
26  For to itself diverteth all my care
27  That theme whereof I have been made the scribe.

25  Messo t'ho innanzi; omai per te ti ciba;
26  ché a sé torce tutta la mia cura
27  quella materia ond' io son fatto scriba.

28  The greatest of the ministers of nature,
29  Who with the power of heaven the world imprints
30  And measures with his light the time for us,

28  Lo ministro maggior de la natura,
29  che del valor del ciel lo mondo imprenta
30  e col suo lume il tempo ne misura,

31  With that part which above is called to mind
32  Conjoined, along the spirals was revolving,
33  Where each time earlier he presents himself;

31  con quella parte che sù si rammenta
32  congiunto, si girava per le spire
33  in che più tosto ognora s'appresenta;

34  And I was with him; but of the ascending
35  I was not conscious, saving as a man
36  Of a first thought is conscious ere it come;

34  e io era con lui; ma del salire
35  non m'accors' io, se non com' uom s'accorge,
36  anzi 'l primo pensier, del suo venire.

37  And Beatrice, she who is seen to pass
38  From good to better, and so suddenly
39  That not by time her action is expressed,

37  È Bëatrice quella che sì scorge
38  di bene in meglio, sì subitamente
39  che l'atto suo per tempo non si sporge.

40  How lucent in herself must she have been!
41  And what was in the sun, wherein I entered,
42  Apparent not by colour but by light,

40  Quant' esser convenia da sé lucente
41  quel ch'era dentro al sol dov' io entra'mi,
42  non per color, ma per lume parvente!

43  I, though I call on genius, art, and practice,
44  Cannot so tell that it could be imagined;
45  Believe one can, and let him long to see it.

43  Perch' io lo 'ngegno e l'arte e l'uso chiami,
44 sì nol direi che mai s'imaginasse;
45 ma creder puossi e di veder si brami.

46  And if our fantasies too lowly are
47  For altitude so great, it is no marvel,
48  Since o'er the sun was never eye could go.

46  E se le fantasie nostre son basse
47  a tanta altezza, non è maraviglia;
48  ché sopra 'l sol non fu occhio ch'andasse.

49  Such in this place was the fourth family
50  Of the high Father, who forever sates it,
51  Showing how he breathes forth and how begets.

49  Tal era quivi la quarta famiglia
50  de l'alto Padre, che sempre la sazia,
51  mostrando come spira e come figlia.

52  And Beatrice began: "Give thanks, give thanks
53  Unto the Sun of Angels, who to this
54  Sensible one has raised thee by his grace!"

52  E Bëatrice cominciò: “Ringrazia,
53  ringrazia il Sol de li angeli, ch'a questo
54  sensibil t'ha levato per sua grazia.”

55  Never was heart of mortal so disposed
56  To worship, nor to give itself to God
57  With all its gratitude was it so ready,

55  Cor di mortal non fu mai sì digesto
56  a divozione e a rendersi a Dio
57  con tutto 'l suo gradir cotanto presto,

58  As at those words did I myself become;
59   And all my love was so absorbed in Him,
60  That in oblivion Beatrice was eclipsed.

58  come a quelle parole mi fec' io;
59  e sì tutto 'l mio amore in lui si mise,
60  che Bëatrice eclissò ne l'oblio.

61  Nor this displeased her; but she smiled at it
62  So that the splendour of her laughing eyes
63  My single mind on many things divided.

61  Non le dispiacque, ma sì se ne rise,
62  che lo splendor de li occhi suoi ridenti
63  mia mente unita in più cose divise.

64  Lights many saw I, vivid and triumphant,
65  Make us a centre and themselves a circle,
66  More sweet in voice than luminous in aspect.

64  Io vidi più folgór vivi e vincenti
65  far di noi centro e di sé far corona,
66  più dolci in voce che in vista lucenti:

67  Thus girt about the daughter of Latona
68  We sometimes see, when pregnant is the air,
69  So that it holds the thread which makes her zone.

67  così cinger la figlia di Latona
68  vedem talvolta, quando l'aere è pregno,
69  sì che ritenga il fil che fa la zona.

70  Within the court of Heaven, whence I return,
71  Are many jewels found, so fair and precious
72  They cannot be transported from the realm;

70  Ne la corte del cielo, ond' io rivegno,
71  si trovan molte gioie care e belle
72  tanto che non si posson trar del regno;

73  And of them was the singing of those lights.
74  Who takes not wings that he may fly up thither,
75  The tidings thence may from the dumb await!

73  e 'l canto di quei lumi era di quelle;
74  chi non s'impenna sì che là sù voli,
75  dal muto aspetti quindi le novelle.

76  As soon as singing thus those burning suns
77  Had round about us whirled themselves three times,
78  Like unto stars neighbouring the steadfast poles,

76  Poi, sì cantando, quelli ardenti soli
77  si fuor girati intorno a noi tre volte,
78  come stelle vicine a' fermi poli,

79  Ladies they seemed, not from the dance released,
80  But who stop short, in silence listening
81  Till they have gathered the new melody.

79  donne mi parver, non da ballo sciolte,
80  ma che s'arrestin tacite, ascoltando
81  fin che le nove note hanno ricolte.

82  And within one I heard beginning: "When
83  The radiance of grace, by which is kindled
84  True love, and which thereafter grows by loving,

82  E dentro a l'un senti' cominciar: “Quando
83  lo raggio de la grazia, onde s'accende
84  verace amore e che poi cresce amando,

85  Within thee multiplied is so resplendent
86  That it conducts thee upward by that stair,
87  Where without reascending none descends,

85  multiplicato in te tanto resplende,
86  che ti conduce su per quella scala
87  u' sanza risalir nessun discende;

88  Who should deny the wine out of his vial
89  Unto thy thirst, in liberty were not
90  Except as water which descends not seaward.

88  qual ti negasse il vin de la sua fiala
89  per la tua sete, in libertà non fora
90  se non com' acqua ch'al mar non si cala.

91  Fain wouldst thou know with what plants is enflowered
92  This garland that encircles with delight
93  The Lady fair who makes thee strong for heaven.

91  Tu vuo' saper di quai piante s'infiora
92  questa ghirlanda che 'ntorno vagheggia
93 la bella donna ch'al ciel t'avvalora.

94  Of the lambs was I of the holy flock
95  Which Dominic conducteth by a road
96  Where well one fattens if he strayeth not.

94  Io fui de li agni de la santa greggia
95  che Domenico mena per cammino
96  u' ben s'impingua se non si vaneggia.

97  He who is nearest to me on the right
98  My brother and master was; and he Albertus
99  Is of Cologne, I Thomas of Aquinum.

97  Questi che m'è a destra più vicino,
98  frate e maestro fummi, ed esso Alberto
99  è di Cologna, e io Thomas d'Aquino.

100  If thou of all the others wouldst be certain,
101  Follow behind my speaking with thy sight
102  Upward along the blessed garland turning.

100  Se sì di tutti li altri esser vuo' certo,
101  di retro al mio parlar ten vien col viso
102  girando su per lo beato serto.

103  That next effulgence issues from the smile
104  Of Gratian, who assisted both the courts
105  In such wise that it pleased in Paradise.

103  Quell' altro fiammeggiare esce del riso
104  di Grazïan, che l'uno e l'altro foro
105  aiutò sì che piace in paradiso.

106  The other which near by adorns our choir
107  That Peter was who, e'en as the poor widow,
108  Offered his treasure unto Holy Church.

106  L'altro ch'appresso addorna il nostro coro,
107  quel Pietro fu che con la poverella
108  offerse a Santa Chiesa suo tesoro.

109  The fifth light, that among us is the fairest,
110  Breathes forth from such a love, that all the world
111  Below is greedy to learn tidings of it.

109  La quinta luce, ch'è tra noi più bella,
110  spira di tale amor, che tutto 'l mondo
111  là giù ne gola di saper novella:

112  Within it is the lofty mind, where knowledge
113  So deep was put, that, if the true be true,
114  To see so much there never rose a second.

112  entro v'è l'alta mente u' sì profondo
113  saver fu messo, che, se 'l vero è vero,
114  a veder tanto non surse il secondo.

115  Thou seest next the lustre of that taper,
116  Which in the flesh below looked most within
117  The angelic nature and its ministry.

115  Appresso vedi il lume di quel cero
116  che giù in carne più a dentro vide
117  l'angelica natura e 'l ministero.

118  Within that other little light is smiling
119  The advocate of the Christian centuries,
120  Out of whose rhetoric Augustine was furnished.

118  Ne l'altra piccioletta luce ride
119  quello avvocato de' tempi cristiani
120  del cui latino Augustin si provide.

121  Now if thou trainest thy mind's eye along
122  From light to light pursuant of my praise,
123  With thirst already of the eighth thou waitest.

121  Or se tu l'occhio de la mente trani
122  di luce in luce dietro a le mie lode,
123  già de l'ottava con sete rimani.

124  By seeing every good therein exults
125  The sainted soul, which the fallacious world
126  Makes manifest to him who listeneth well;

124  Per vedere ogne ben dentro vi gode
125  l'anima santa che 'l mondo fallace
126  fa manifesto a chi di lei ben ode.

127  The body whence 'twas hunted forth is lying
128  Down in Cieldauro, and from martyrdom
129  And banishment it came unto this peace.

127  Lo corpo ond' ella fu cacciata giace
128  giuso in Cieldauro; ed essa da martiro
129  e da essilio venne a questa pace.

130  See farther onward flame the burning breath
131  Of Isidore, of Beda, and of Richard
132  Who was in contemplation more than man.

130  Vedi oltre fiammeggiar l'ardente spiro
131  d'Isidoro, di Beda e di Riccardo,
132  che a considerar fu più che viro.

133  This, whence to me returneth thy regard,
134  The light is of a spirit unto whom
135  In his grave meditations death seemed slow.

133  Questi onde a me ritorna il tuo riguardo,
134  è 'l lume d'uno spirto che 'n pensieri
135  gravi a morir li parve venir tardo:

136  It is the light eternal of Sigier,
137  Who, reading lectures in the Street of Straw,
138  Did syllogize invidious verities."

136  essa è la luce etterna di Sigieri,
137  che, leggendo nel Vico de li Strami,
138  silogizzò invidïosi veri.”

139  Then, as a horologe that calleth us
140  What time the Bride of God is rising up
141  With matins to her Spouse that he may love her,

139  Indi, come orologio che ne chiami
140  ne l'ora che la sposa di Dio surge
141  a mattinar lo sposo perché l'ami,

142  Wherein one part the other draws and urges,
143  Ting! ting! resounding with so sweet a note,
144  That swells with love the spirit well disposed,

142  che l'una parte e l'altra tira e urge,
143  tin tin sonando con sì dolce nota,
144  che 'l ben disposto spirto d'amor turge;

145  Thus I beheld the glorious wheel move round,
146  And render voice to voice, in modulation
147  And sweetness that can not be comprehended,

145  così vid'ïo la gloriosa rota
146  muoversi e render voce a voce in tempra
147  e in dolcezza ch'esser non pò nota

148  Excepting there where joy is made eternal.

148  se non colà dove gioir s'insempra.

Canto XI
Diseases of the soul, of the body, of the body-politic, all of them accumulating together in a single crisis which comes with the horrible realization that from infancy to old age one has built one's identity through experiences that have accrued both as aspirations and repulsions, the one dependent on the other and both cankers that compel: compel to what?  Take your pick, the text lists eight possibilities, all of which have the taint of temporality, all of which, though seemingly opposed, one good, one bad, work in tandem as wings which propel one into more and more restrictive and painful constrictions, in brief, to downward flight.  We are moving in this canto, and in the poem in toto, towards a radical renunciation of all temporal hindrances.  We are shedding all of those things that are temporal and mortal, all of those things that stick us to the world, and accumulate in us as those leadened desires of dis-ease.  We are talking about freedom, emancipation, and the glorification of that which the world abhors, poverty, nakedness, pain, shame, loss of identity, honor, and even the notoriety which might come from infamy.  We are talking about the embracing of that which is filthy, despised, disparaged, a state of being as seen through mortal eyes as repulsive, and even insane, but which seen from one of the two states referred to in this canto: the seraphic state (love) or the cherubic state (wisdom) as exultation, and above all, as freedom.  In the Hindu tradition we have two paths to freedom: jnana yoga, union with the divine through wisdom, or bhakti yoga, union with the divine through love.  Dante, in this canto conflates these two states, and thus expands the sun of freedom by doubling its light, whereas in the world of temporality they diminished one another through mutual opposition.  Two saints appear here: One, the cherubically wise, Saint Thomas Aquinas, who manifests in order to praise the other, Saint Francis, the seraphic lover of Lady Poverty.  The lesson is plain: The ultimate wisdom humbles itself by praising love.  We may learn of ultimate love later — although we know it now through the figure of Beatrice, who embodies both the spirit of wisdom, Sophia, and the spirit of love.   She stands with Dante at the center of this circling of saints, both the circle and its center pausing in stillness here, rapt by Saint Thomas' hagiography of Saint Francis.

If I put this in the context of my own life, it appears to me now as a series of avoidances.  At age 71, I do not want to be sick.  I do not want to be in pain.  I do not want to be poor.  I do not want to be shamed or humiliated.  I do not want to be unloved or misunderstood or ignored or unappreciated, and I do not want to see any of these things manifested in the politics or communities of my world.  If I imagine the feeling states which accompany any and all of these avoidances, I find myself, my very mortal identity, as a conglomeration of components that lock together and grind out fear.  Fear is the binding agent, and what Freud called the ego, the sense of self which continually defines itself in relation to how successful it can be in keeping these inner terrors from becoming binding outer circumstances.  And, as long as I am occupied in forging these chains of avoidance, I am bound more and more tightly to a state of fear, an ego built around trauma, the perception of trauma, the avoidance of trauma.  Saint Francis turned the world upside-down by embracing what I and others avoid, and if we are to take Dante's word for it here, this madness is wisdom, and this wisdom is love.

None of this to be construed as a sort of romantic idealism.  Would you make friends with cancer or the fatal virus of the current pandemic?  Would you leave your house and remove your shoes to sit barefoot in rags with the homeless on some city street corner?  Would you be thought deranged?  Would you seek to be shunned?  Would you embrace the worst of a worldly condition for the promise of an immortal exultation?  I think there is a shift in this canto from the moral to the aesthetic.  That's a vague and almost sickeningly irresponsible assertion, I know, and I cannot justify making it — just yet.  Just how is Dante's poetry going to shine with love, wisdom, and beauty by literally embracing pain and squalor and ignorance?  It may be that the state of loving wisdom is not a literal state at all, but a literary, and artistic one.  To say this may be arrogance or foolishness, but at the nadir of Saint Francis' suffering is the negation of the fear of suffering, and that negation does not manifest itself in what we mistakenly call life, and what the Yogis call Maya.  It manifests in a poem: The Canticle to the Sun, which is where we are situated in this canto.  Not in the physical sun, which would be ridiculous and impossible, but in a poetic one.  Does this trivialize life experience in favor of an aesthetic escape,  or is it the apotheosis that we have been seeking in order to negate the terror we feel in this ego built from avoidances?  For it to be the latter, we would have to considerably elevate the intensity and, yes, divinity, of the aesthetic experience.  This would certainly not be the way of the world, but it may well have been the way of Dante the poet, and maybe even the way of some of Dante's readers. 

The Divine Seal of Saint Francis was the stigmata of Christ, the appearance of Christ's wounds on his body.  These marks are marks of pain and persecution, not persecution from an outside agency, but an auto-immune disease persecution, pain as faith, or faith as pain.  Can we even imagine a thing so perverse?  And yet mortal life is insolubly wedded to suffering as Gautama discovered as the first step in his journey towards Buddhahood.  We are not talking about tolerance, or acceptance, or surrender here, we are talking about the marriage bed, about the swift heartbeat and swift feet of the bride hungering for the bridegroom, the bereft soul seeking the only consummation which will exult her and bring her peace.  We are talking about beauty in search of the beatific, and we need only recall those passages in the Vita Nuove, when the 9 year-old Dante sees the 9 year-old Beatrice, to understand the complete and ultimately joyful disruption of the senses and devastation of the mind that such a stigmata of heart palpitations and mindlessness occasions.  Such an experience cannot possibly resolve itself in the body or the body politic.  Embracing either of those two is the disease of the soul as an attitude towards the warring compromises with death that mortal life has to make in every moment of its physical existence.  The body kills to live, and finally becomes food for some other form of death-devouring life.  How could this be a paradise or the design of a God or Universe with the syzygy of love and wisdom as its progenitors?  Dante's answer to this dilemma occurs at the beginning of this canto wherein he admonishes the reader to reject those downward flapping wings, and brags, yes, brags, that through his union with Beatrice, he has freed himself of such suffering — and, having freed himself, he thus enjoys the glories of heaven.  He seems to be asking here, that given the conditions of the world, and everything eaten by the jaws of time: What could those glories be but aesthetic ones?  

The mixed metaphors which are the guiding lights of this canto are the cleft plant, and the fattened sheep: the cut flowers on the table of a meal of roasted lamb and sheep's milk.  Who feasts at that table?  This canto says: not the diners, but those who ornament and provide the feast with the sacrifice of their own bodies.  These are the ones who stand at the center of the circling saints: Beatrice and Dante.  If you are a reader here, you should know that you too are being fatted, beatified and beautified, to prepare yourself to be this festive meal.

But it's not about the suffering.  It never was about the suffering.  It's about the love.  It's about the wisdom of the soul, which prompts us to reject the false, death-embracing wisdom of the world, and guides us, by means of the most profound via negativa, through the cherubic path of philosophy — literally the love of wisdom, the love of Sophia — to the seraphic state.  This seraphic state may be that final exultation in which a self is aware of itself, but aware of itself only as the ecstatic contemplation of God's love.  Such a soul has no room in itself for suffering, no breath except the breath of praise.

Still, this life of Saint Francis in the sphere of the sun proposes profoundly unsettling questions.  Here Jean Paul Sartre's Being and Nothingness collides with the Clear Light Void of the Buddha.  In the wake of such a collision, we can only take it on trust that this vacuum is a plenum.  We can only take it on trust that the egg of this zero can birth a cosmos.  Could anything like love thrive without such trust?  Is freedom worth having if it is only the freedom to experience perpetual terror?  Once we start asking such questions, they begin to dangerously proliferate.  Is my trust or distrust in God coincident with my trust in No-thing?  And is my fear of God coincident with my Fear of Nothing?  And, is this Godly Nothingness the primary impetus of my love and the very source of my creativity and freedom?  The dangerous territory that the poem is entering here is much like that post-mortem Bardo spoken of in the Tibetan Book of the Dead: A clear, bright emptiness, a state of being stripped of everything but freedom and the latent potential to become anything at all.  And here, in the act of reading, is a moment, aesthetically like the moment of physical death.   At that moment, time stops and the soul is thrust into eternity.  The soul sees this light, but it offers no more attraction than do leprous wounds.  And the soul also sees a smokiness, full of the allure and promise of mortal fame, fortune, adulation, and sensory delight.  And though the priest will whisper in the corpse's ear to embrace the first, and reject the second, few do so, but the few who do so, find, like Saint Francis, their final home in the celestial palace of liberation.   

1  O Thou insensate care of mortal men,
2  How inconclusive are the syllogisms
3  That make thee beat thy wings in downward flight!

1  O insensata cura de' mortali,
2  quanto son difettivi silogismi
3  quei che ti fanno in basso batter l'ali!

4  One after laws and one to aphorisms
5  Was going, and one following the priesthood,
6  And one to reign by force or sophistry,

4  Chi dietro a iura e chi ad amforismi
5  sen giva, e chi seguendo sacerdozio,
6  e chi regnar per forza o per sofismi,

7  And one in theft, and one in state affairs,
8  One in the pleasures of the flesh involved
9  Wearied himself, one gave himself to ease;

7  e chi rubare e chi civil negozio,
8  chi nel diletto de la carne involto
9  s'affaticava e chi si dava a l'ozio,

10  When I, from all these things emancipate,
11  With Beatrice above there in the Heavens
12  With such exceeding glory was received!

10  quando, da tutte queste cose sciolto,
11  con Bëatrice m'era suso in cielo
12  cotanto glorïosamente accolto.

13  When each one had returned unto that point
14  Within the circle where it was before,
15  It stood as in a candlestick a candle;

13  Poi che ciascuno fu tornato ne lo
14  punto del cerchio in che avanti s'era,
15  fermossi, come a candellier candelo.

16  And from within the effulgence which at first
17  Had spoken unto me, I heard begin
18  Smiling while it more luminous became:

16  E io senti' dentro a quella lumera
17  che pria m'avea parlato, sorridendo
18  incominciar, faccendosi più mera:

19  "Even as I am kindled in its ray,
20  So, looking into the Eternal Light,
21  The occasion of thy thoughts I apprehend.

19  “Così com' io del suo raggio resplendo,
20  sì, riguardando ne la luce etterna,
21  li tuoi pensieri onde cagioni apprendo.

22  Thou doubtest, and wouldst have me to resift
23  In language so extended and so open
24  My speech, that to thy sense it may be plain,

22  Tu dubbi, e hai voler che si ricerna
23  in sì aperta e 'n sì distesa lingua
24  lo dicer mio, ch'al tuo sentir si sterna,

25  Where just before I said, 'where well one fattens,'
26  And where I said, 'there never rose a second;'
27  And here 'tis needful we distinguish well.

25  ove dinanzi dissi: 'U' ben s'impingua,'
26  e là u' dissi: 'Non nacque il secondo';
27  e qui è uopo che ben si distingua.

28  The Providence, which governeth the world
29  With counsel, wherein all created vision
30  Is vanquished ere it reach unto the bottom,

28  La provedenza, che governa il mondo
29  con quel consiglio nel quale ogne aspetto
30  creato è vinto pria che vada al fondo,

31  (So that towards her own Beloved might go
32  The bride of Him who, uttering a loud cry,
33  Espoused her with his consecrated blood,

31  però che andasse ver' lo suo diletto
32  la sposa di colui ch'ad alte grida
33  disposò lei col sangue benedetto,

34  Self-confident and unto Him more faithful,)
35  Two Princes did ordain in her behoof,
36  Which on this side and that might be her guide.

34  in sé sicura e anche a lui più fida,
35  due principi ordinò in suo favore,
36  che quinci e quindi le fosser per guida.

37  The one was all seraphical in ardour;
38  The other by his wisdom upon earth
39  A splendour was of light cherubical.

37  L'un fu tutto serafico in ardore;
38  l'altro per sapïenza in terra fue
39  di cherubica luce uno splendore.

40  One will I speak of, for of both is spoken
41  In praising one, whichever may be taken,
42  Because unto one end their labours were.

40  De l'un dirò, però che d'amendue
41  si dice l'un pregiando, qual ch'om prende,
42  perch' ad un fine fur l'opere sue.

43  Between Tupino and the stream that falls
44  Down from the hill elect of blessed Ubald,
45  A fertile slope of lofty mountain hangs,

43  Intra Tupino e l'acqua che discende
44  del colle eletto dal beato Ubaldo,
45  fertile costa d'alto monte pende,

46  From which Perugia feels the cold and heat
47  Through Porta Sole, and behind it weep
48  Gualdo and Nocera their grievous yoke.

46  onde Perugia sente freddo e caldo
47  da Porta Sole; e di rietro le piange
48  per grave giogo Nocera con Gualdo.

49  From out that slope, there where it breaketh most
50  Its steepness, rose upon the world a sun
51  As this one does sometimes from out the Ganges;

49  Di questa costa, là dov' ella frange
50  più sua rattezza, nacque al mondo un sole,
51  come fa questo talvolta di Gange.

52  Therefore let him who speaketh of that place,
53  Say not Ascesi, for he would say little,
54  But Orient, if he properly would speak.

52  Però chi d'esso loco fa parole,
53  non dica Ascesi, ché direbbe corto,
54  ma Orïente, se proprio dir vuole.

55  He was not yet far distant from his rising
56  Before he had begun to make the earth
57  Some comfort from his mighty virtue feel.

55  Non era ancor molto lontan da l'orto,
56  ch'el cominciò a far sentir la terra
57  de la sua gran virtute alcun conforto;

58  For he in youth his father's wrath incurred
59  For certain Dame, to whom, as unto death,
60  The gate of pleasure no one doth unlock;

58  ché per tal donna, giovinetto, in guerra
59  del padre corse, a cui, come a la morte,
60  la porta del piacer nessun diserra;

61  And was before his spiritual court
62  'Et coram patre' unto her united;
63  Then day by day more fervently he loved her.

61  e dinanzi a la sua spirital corte
62  et coram patre le si fece unito;
63  poscia di dì in dì l'amò più forte.

64  She, reft of her first husband, scorned, obscure,
65  One thousand and one hundred years and more,
66  Waited without a suitor till he came.

64  Questa, privata del primo marito,
65  millecent' anni e più dispetta e scura
66  fino a costui si stette sanza invito;

67  Naught it availed to hear, that with Amyclas
68  Found her unmoved at sounding of his voice
69  He who struck terror into all the world;

67  né valse udir che la trovò sicura
68  con Amiclate, al suon de la sua voce,
69  colui ch'a tutto 'l mondo fé paura;

70  Naught it availed being constant and undaunted,
71  So that, when Mary still remained below,
72  She mounted up with Christ upon the cross.

70  né valse esser costante né feroce,
71  sì che, dove Maria rimase giuso,
72  ella con Cristo pianse in su la croce.

73  But that too darkly I may not proceed,
74  Francis and Poverty for these two lovers
75  Take thou henceforward in my speech diffuse.

73  Ma perch' io non proceda troppo chiuso,
74  Francesco e Povertà per questi amanti
75  prendi oramai nel mio parlar diffuso.

76  Their concord and their joyous semblances,
77  The love, the wonder, and the sweet regard,
78  They made to be the cause of holy thoughts;

76  La lor concordia e i lor lieti sembianti,
77 amore e maraviglia e dolce sguardo
78  facieno esser cagion di pensier santi;

79  So much so that the venerable Bernard
80  First bared his feet, and after so great peace
81  Ran, and, in running, thought himself too slow.

79  tanto che 'l venerabile Bernardo
80  si scalzò prima, e dietro a tanta pace
81  corse e, correndo, li parve esser tardo.

82  O wealth unknown! O veritable good!
83  Giles bares his feet, and bares his feet Sylvester
84  Behind the bridegroom, so doth please the bride!

82  Oh ignota ricchezza! oh ben ferace!
83  Scalzasi Egidio, scalzasi Silvestro
84  dietro a lo sposo, sì la sposa piace.

85  Then goes his way that father and that master,
86  He and his Lady and that family
87  Which now was girding on the humble cord;

85  Indi sen va quel padre e quel maestro
86  con la sua donna e con quella famiglia
87  che già legava l'umile capestro

88  Nor cowardice of heart weighed down his brow
89  At being son of Peter Bernardone,
90  Nor for appearing marvellously scorned;

88  Né li gravò viltà di cuor le ciglia
89  per esser fi' di Pietro Bernardone,
90  90 né per parer dispetto a maraviglia;

91  But regally his hard determination
92  To Innocent he opened, and from him
93  Received the primal seal upon his Order.

91  ma regalmente sua dura intenzione
92  ad Innocenzio aperse, e da lui ebbe
93  primo sigillo a sua religïone.

94  After the people mendicant increased
95  Behind this man, whose admirable life
96  Better in glory of the heavens were sung,

94  Poi che la gente poverella crebbe
95  dietro a costui, la cui mirabil vita
96 meglio in gloria del ciel si canterebbe,

97  Incoronated with a second crown
98  Was through Honorius by the Eternal Spirit
99  The holy purpose of this Archimandrite.

97  di seconda corona redimita
98  fu per Onorio da l'Etterno Spiro
99  la santa voglia d'esto archimandrita.

100  And when he had, through thirst of martyrdom,
101  In the proud presence of the Sultan preached
102  Christ and the others who came after him,

100  E poi che, per la sete del martiro,
101 ne la presenza del Soldan superba
102  predicò Cristo e li altri che 'l seguiro,

103  And, finding for conversion too unripe
104  The folk, and not to tarry there in vain,
105  Returned to fruit of the Italic grass,

103  e per trovare a conversione acerba
104  troppo la gente e per non stare indarno,
105  redissi al frutto de l'italica erba,

106  On the rude rock 'twixt Tiber and the Arno
107  From Christ did he receive the final seal,
108  Which during two whole years his members bore.

106  nel crudo sasso intra Tevero e Arno
107  da Cristo prese l'ultimo sigillo,
108  che le sue membra due anni portarno.

109  When He, who chose him unto so much good,
110  Was pleased to draw him up to the reward
111  That he had merited by being lowly,

109  Quando a colui ch'a tanto ben sortillo
110  piacque di trarlo suso a la mercede
111  ch'el meritò nel suo farsi pusillo,

112  Unto his friars, as to the rightful heirs,
113  His most dear Lady did he recommend,
114  And bade that they should love her faithfully;

112  a' frati suoi, sì com' a giuste rede,
113  raccomandò la donna sua più cara,
114  e comandò che l'amassero a fede;

115  And from her bosom the illustrious soul
116  Wished to depart, returning to its realm,
117  And for its body wished no other bier.

115  e del suo grembo l'anima preclara
116  mover si volle, tornando al suo regno,
117  e al suo corpo non volle altra bara.

118  Think now what man was he, who was a fit
119  Companion over the high seas to keep
120  The bark of Peter to its proper bearings.

118  Pensa oramai qual fu colui che degno
119  collega fu a mantener la barca
120  di Pietro in alto mar per dritto segno;

121  And this man was our Patriarch; hence whoever
122  Doth follow him as he commands can see
123  That he is laden with good merchandise.

121  e questo fu il nostro patrïarca;
122  per che qual segue lui, com' el comanda,
123  discerner puoi che buone merce carca.

124  But for new pasturage his flock has grown
125  So greedy, that it is impossible
126  They be not scattered over fields diverse;

124  Ma 'l suo pecuglio di nova vivanda
125   è fatto ghiotto, sì ch'esser non puote
126  che per diversi salti non si spanda;

127  And in proportion as his sheep remote
128  And vagabond go farther off from him,
129  More void of milk return they to the fold.

127  e quanto le sue pecore remote
128  e vagabunde più da esso vanno,
129  più tornano a l'ovil di latte vòte.

130  Verily some there are that fear a hurt,
131  And keep close to the shepherd; but so few,
132  That little cloth doth furnish forth their hoods.

130  Ben son di quelle che temono 'l danno
131  e stringonsi al pastor; ma son sì poche,
132  che le cappe fornisce poco panno.

133  Now if my utterance be not indistinct,
134  If thine own hearing hath attentive been,
135  If thou recall to mind what I have said,

133  Or, se le mie parole non son fioche,
134  se la tua audïenza è stata attenta,
135  se ciò ch'è detto a la mente revoche,

136  In part contented shall thy wishes be;
137  For thou shalt see the plant that's chipped away,
138  And the rebuke that lieth in the words,

136  in parte fia la tua voglia contenta,
137  perché vedrai la pianta onde si scheggia,
138  e vedra' il corrègger che argomenta

139  'Where well one fattens, if he strayeth not.'"

139  'U' ben s'impingua, se non si vaneggia.'”

Canto XII
In Canto XI we had the hagiographical reflection of the sun of Saint Francis in the exposition of Saint Thomas Aquinas, and here, in Canto XII, we have the same, in the exposition of Saint Dominic's life by Saint Bonaventure.  Is there, in the psychic life of the mind of Saint Dominic, the equivalent of the renunciation of the body made by Saint Francis?  Is there a philosophical Lady Poverty, loathed by the world, but embraced by the saint, and does such a mental marriage lead to a similar glory and freedom, as did the spiritual perversions of Saint Francis?  I wonder.  The sun of Saint Francis was all accepting, nourishing evil and good, and in fact, not even making a distinction between them, except to say that love like this requires a poverty of body and spirit, as a kind of empty channel, which allows the space for such bliss to flow.  But Saint Dominic does make distinctions, he had his orthodox beliefs, and his rejected heresies, he is a good friend and a very bad enemy.  The record is not totally clear, but even if he did not burn his enemies at the stake, the growing popular belief that he presided over the most horrific auto-de-fays not only affirmed such, but shows that he heartily approved, and, in fact, his claim to sainthood, as Dante's text seems to imply, is largely based upon his alacrity in carrying out the eradication of not just the spiritual ideas of those who disagreed with him, but their physical bodies as well.  This brings me up against something that seems to persist in Dante's psyche, and, I must confess, too often in mine as well, of creating what Blake called a "cloven fiction," the splitting of the world into moral/immoral or accepted/unaccepted.  But it is not as if the unaccepted can be allowed to just go its own way.  The Cathars, who were the chief heretics in Dominic's era, were never accused of "bad" behavior.  On the contrary, they were even praised by the orthodox, who were piously bent on murdering them, for their upright lives, often, too often, far more upright than the corrupt officials of the Church.  But their upright behavior did not matter.  They were burned, and indeed, subjected to one of the first historical genocides in Europe, because somehow it was thought that their beliefs were so poisonous that they would infect and destroy the entire edifice of Catholic sanctimony.  They seem to have been equated with those hypocrites whom Jesus denounced as those who not only could not enter the kingdom of heaven, but whose very presence barred the way for others.  From the Catholic point of view of Saint Dominic, such people could never be simply segregated, they must be reformed or liquidated.  Their heresy, and in fact the whole idea of Divine Justice promulgated throughout the Commedia, demands retribution, demands, in fact, that a punishment or correction involving pain be meated out to the offenders in equal measure, and often in far more than equal measure, to the pain that they are alleged to have caused.  One definition of pain could be: Pain is the heresy which dynamically interrupts orthodoxy's comfortable slide towards pre-mortem rigor mortis, pain is the extreme challenge to a moribund rationality and a frozen — as is Dante's Satan — and vacuous post-mortem state.  If the heretic's were allowed to be, the philosophic or theological search for truth in the Universe would imply a frozen stop, like Satan's, and not the unmovable uncaused cause of the Empyrean.  What would remain would be two petrified forces, locked in a perpetual death grip of utter stasis.  Dante's search for transcendence runs the high risk that in seeking the stillness of the Empyrean, he may wind up in the deep freeze of the Satan.  The entire structure of the poem and the very steps ascending to the ultimate transcendence of its pilgrim aspirant is built on this searching and shifting foundation.  We may reach the heaven of acceptance exemplified by Saint Francis, but only by climbing the mountain of pain and of retribution promulgated by Saint Dominic.  Temporal, earthly life, for Dante, as it was later for Darwin, was utterly rooted in pain and death, and as such, much of the process of transcendence involves an unmerciful militancy to root out everything that does not paradoxically lead to Saint Frances' all-embracing mercy.  By placing these two saints together, and linking them with numerous examples of substance and reflection, sound and echo, the poem presents us with a quite perilous recipe for a spiritual apotheosis, one that is perhaps not present at all in Buddhism or Hinduism, but lies at the very core of Christianity.  It is as if Christ's parable of the vineyard workers and his various words on forgiveness was contrasted by his treatment of the moneylenders outside the temple and by Saint John's vision of annihilation in Revelations.  Which of these two positions is substance and which reflection, which sound and which echo?  Dante, I believe has made that choice by presenting Saint Francis first, as an uncaused cause, but Dante is not so naive as to believe that even if one knows the difference between substance and sound, between that which is fundamental and that which is derivative, the former always conjures forth the latter, at least in the temporal world of mortality, and if we are to believe the text of the poem, in these lower reaches of Paradise as well.  

This canto is both densified and rarified by what might be called "The Master Metaphor Mix."  By referring to different realms of thought and experience — the musical, the optic, the geographical, the scriptural, the mythological, the geometrical, the numerological, the agricultural, the mechanical (mills/clocks), the biographical, the historical, the political, the ecclesiastical, the moral, the judicial, and so on and so forth, Dante densifies his text by guiding the reader to go inside and reference all these different fields of consciousness, but he also rarifies it, insofar, as he is constantly demanding his reader to go outside the text to learn about his various references.  In short, the text not only instructs, but illustrates the methods of instruction.  The entire commentary tradition, which has far extended the temporal life of the poem, shows just how effective the Commedia has been in expanding not only the consciousness of its individual readers, but also by expanding our collective consciousness as well.  This accomplishment is not exactly analogous to the philosophic and theological writings of people like Aquinas and Augustine, and of those others whom the text refers to in these twin canti of 11 and 12 of the Paradiso.  Because Dante's accomplishment is poetic, it not only achieves its aims through its content, but also through its mastery of poetic technique.  You can agree or disagree with the Commedia's content, or you can ponder the choices which this content presents for you, but his mastery of technique is inarguable, and is no more subject to acceptance or refutation than is the very existence of the brain and language that has fashioned it, or the attention required to read it.   Dante's proposals are aesthetic, and his paradise is neither quite physical nor quite metaphysical, their truth, like Beatrice's love and beauty, is existential, and as such incontrovertible.  It is the alpha and omega, the thing that is left, when everything else on earth and in heaven has  been sifted and found wanting — that is to say — the poem.

Dante insists in this canto and in the previous one that the characters of the two Saints, Francis and Dominic, be fused in our consideration, and he further insists on sticking to a metaphor of militancy as a description of that dual character.  An attribute which seems especially inappropriate when applied to Saint Francis.  We could be tempted to say that we are in Bhagavad Gita territory here, and that this militancy is, especially in the case of Saint Francis, about an inner battle against one's own destructive habits of action and states of mind.  But that cannot be what the text means, or be solely what it means.  Why?  Because of its emphasis on heresy.  One can have heretical thoughts and beliefs, but you cannot be an heretic to your own self, your own soul, and the heresy spoken about here to which Saint Dominic added a literal fire and fury by presiding over the burning of physical bodies is that enemy in other people which cannot be tolerated by one's own soul.  This heresy is the sin of the other, which threatens and entangles yourself.  By Freud or Jung, this might have been called 'projection,' but just because we can now label it, doesn't mean that we can avoid it, or even mean that we should avoid it.  We can't read this canto without confronting this issue.  I know it's there in me, but for now at least, I don't pretend to understand it.  I found the following quote by Miguel de Unamuno, from his Tragic Sense of Life. 

The real sin — perhaps it is the sin against the Holy Ghost for which there is no remission — is the sin of heresy — the sin of thinking for oneself.

One has to believe in something that is infallible, whether that be in the doctrine of the Catholic Church, mathematics, money, prestige, immortality, the invariable speed of light, Planck's constant, or one's own ego, that one infallible thing becomes one's raison d'etre, the one bastion that preserves one against a universal nihilism, and if that belief in one's infallible thing be blasphemed by those who would promulgate your own "holy ghost's" ghostliness, than the heretics that would dare such a thing must be converted or destroyed.  Even one counter example would show that infallibility itself, under any circumstances, is an illusion.  Such a situation is as impossible as believing in a personal or cosmic existence that is only reflection, without substance, only echo, without sound sense.  Even utter nihilism maintains a belief in its own infallibility, just as irony cannot be ironic but must be taken seriously for it to be itself.  To read these twinned canti is a kind of preparation by paradox.  Here, the poem forces us to consider how such paradoxes operate, not merely in Hell or in Purgatory, where one would expect them, but also here in the Paradisiacal sphere of the Sun.  We should not forget that all of this which remains unsolvable in the context of a theological or psychological language, in the abstraction of numbers, and in the metaphors of poetry, find in the first, amoral proofs, and in the second, aesthetic pleasure.      

1  Soon as the blessed flame had taken up
2  The final word to give it utterance,
3  Began the holy millstone to revolve,

1  Sì tosto come l'ultima parola
2  la benedetta fiamma per dir tolse,
3  a rotar cominciò la santa mola;

4  And in its gyre had not turned wholly round,
5  Before another in a ring enclosed it,
6  And motion joined to motion, song to song;

4  e nel suo giro tutta non si volse
5  prima ch'un'altra di cerchio la chiuse,
6  e moto a moto e canto a canto colse;
7  Song that as greatly doth transcend our Muses,
8  Our Sirens, in those dulcet clarions,
9  As primal splendour that which is reflected.
7  canto che tanto vince nostre muse,
8  nostre serene in quelle dolci tube,
9  quanto primo splendor quel ch'e' refuse.

10  And as are spanned athwart a tender cloud
11  Two rainbows parallel and like in colour,
12  When Juno to her handmaid gives command,

10  Come si volgon per tenera nube
11  due archi paralelli e concolori,
12  quando Iunone a sua ancella iube,
13  (The one without born of the one within,
14  Like to the speaking of that vagrant one
15  Whom love consumed as doth the sun the vapours,)

13  nascendo di quel d'entro quel di fori,
14  a guisa del parlar di quella vaga
15  ch'amor consunse come sol vapori,
16  And make the people here, through covenant
17  God set with Noah, presageful of the world
18  That shall no more be covered with a flood,

16  e fanno qui la gente esser presaga,
17  per lo patto che Dio con Noè puose,
18  del mondo che già mai più non s'allaga:
19  In such wise of those sempiternal roses
20  The garlands twain encompassed us about,
21  And thus the outer to the inner answered.

19  così di quelle sempiterne rose
20  volgiensi circa noi le due ghirlande,
21  e sì l'estrema a l'intima rispuose.
22  After the dance, and other grand rejoicings,
23  Both of the singing, and the flaming forth
24  Effulgence with effulgence blithe and tender,

22  Poi che 'l tripudio e l'altra festa grande,
23  sì del cantare e sì del fiammeggiarsi
24  luce con luce gaudïose e blande,

25  Together, at once, with one accord had stopped,
26  (Even as the eyes, that, as volition moves them,
27  Must needs together shut and lift themselves,)

25  insieme a punto e a voler quetarsi,
26  pur come li occhi ch'al piacer che i move
27  conviene insieme chiudere e levarsi;

28  Out of the heart of one of the new lights
29  There came a voice, that needle to the star
30  Made me appear in turning thitherward.

28  del cor de l'una de le luci nove
29  si mosse voce, che l'ago a la stella
30  parer mi fece in volgermi al suo dove;

31  And it began: "The love that makes me fair
32  Draws me to speak about the other leader,
33  By whom so well is spoken here of mine.

31  e cominciò: “L'amor che mi fa bella
32  mi tragge a ragionar de l'altro duca
33  per cui del mio sì ben ci si favella.

34  'Tis right, where one is, to bring in the other,
35  That, as they were united in their warfare,
36  Together likewise may their glory shine.

34  Degno è che, dov' è l'un, l'altro s'induca:
35  sì che, com' elli ad una militaro,
36  così la gloria loro insieme luca.

37  The soldiery of Christ, which it had cost
38  So dear to arm again, behind the standard
39  Moved slow and doubtful and in numbers few,

37  L'essercito di Cristo, che sì caro
38  costò a rïarmar, dietro a la 'nsegna
39  si movea tardo, sospeccioso e raro,

40  When the Emperor who reigneth evermore
41  Provided for the host that was in peril,
42  Through grace alone and not that it was worthy;

40  quando lo 'mperador che sempre regna
41  provide a la milizia, ch'era in forse,
42  per sola grazia, non per esser degna;

43  And, as was said, he to his Bride brought succour
44  With champions twain, at whose deed, at whose word
45  The straggling people were together drawn.

43  e, come è detto, a sua sposa soccorse
44  con due campioni, al cui fare, al cui dire
45  lo popol disvïato si raccorse.

46  Within that region where the sweet west wind
47  Rises to open the new leaves, wherewith
48  Europe is seen to clothe herself afresh,

46  In quella parte ove surge ad aprire
47  Zefiro dolce le novelle fronde
48  di che si vede Europa rivestire,

49  Not far off from the beating of the waves,
50  Behind which in his long career the sun
51  Sometimes conceals himself from every man,

49  non molto lungi al percuoter de l'onde
50  dietro a le quali, per la lunga foga,
51  lo sol talvolta ad ogne uom si nasconde,

52  Is situate the fortunate Calahorra,
53  Under protection of the mighty shield
54  In which the Lion subject is and sovereign.

52  siede la fortunata Calaroga
53  sotto la protezion del grande scudo
54  in che soggiace il leone e soggioga:

55  Therein was born the amorous paramour
56  Of Christian Faith, the athlete consecrate,
57  Kind to his own and cruel to his foes;

55  dentro vi nacque l'amoroso drudo
56  de la fede cristiana, il santo atleta
57  benigno a' suoi e a' nemici crudo;

58  And when it was created was his mind
59  Replete with such a living energy,
60  That in his mother her it made prophetic.

58  e come fu creata, fu repleta
59  sì la sua mente di viva virtute
60  che, ne la madre, lei fece profeta.

61  As soon as the espousals were complete
62  Between him and the Faith at holy font,
63  Where they with mutual safety dowered each other,

61  Poi che le sponsalizie fuor compiute
62  al sacro fonte intra lui e la Fede,
63  u' si dotar di mutüa salute,

64  The woman, who for him had given assent,
65  Saw in a dream the admirable fruit
66  That issue would from him and from his heirs;

64  la donna che per lui l'assenso diede,
65  vide nel sonno il mirabile frutto
66  ch'uscir dovea di lui e de le rede;

67  And that he might be construed as he was,
68  A spirit from this place went forth to name him
69  With His possessive whose he wholly was.

67  e perché fosse qual era in costrutto,
68  quinci si mosse spirito a nomarlo
69  del possessivo di cui era tutto.

70  Dominic was he called; and him I speak of
71  Even as of the husbandman whom Christ
72  Elected to his garden to assist him.

70  Domenico fu detto; e io ne parlo
71  sì come de l'agricola che Cristo
72  elesse a l'orto suo per aiutarlo.

73  Envoy and servant sooth he seemed of Christ,
74  For the first love made manifest in him
75  Was the first counsel that was given by Christ.

73  Ben parve messo e famigliar di Cristo:
74  ché 'l primo amor che 'n lui fu manifesto,
75  fu al primo consiglio che diè Cristo.

76  Silent and wakeful many a time was he
77  Discovered by his nurse upon the ground,
78  As if he would have said, 'For this I came.'

76  Spesse fïate fu tacito e desto
77  trovato in terra da la sua nutrice,
78  come dicesse: 'Io son venuto a questo.'

79  O thou his father, Felix verily!
80  O thou his mother, verily Joanna,
81  If this, interpreted, means as is said!

79  Oh padre suo veramente Felice!
80  oh madre sua veramente Giovanna,
81  se, interpretata, val come si dice!

82  Not for the world which people toil for now
83  In following Ostiense and Taddeo,
84  But through his longing after the true manna,

82  Non per lo mondo, per cui mo s'affanna
83  di retro ad Ostïense e a Taddeo,
84  ma per amor de la verace manna

85  He in short time became so great a teacher,
86  That he began to go about the vineyard,
87  Which fadeth soon, if faithless be the dresser;

85  in picciol tempo gran dottor si feo;
86  tal che si mise a circüir la vigna
87  che tosto imbianca, se 'l vignaio è reo.

88  And of the See, (that once was more benignant
89  Unto the righteous poor, not through itself,
90  But him who sits there and degenerates,)

88  E a la sedia che fu già benigna
89  più a' poveri giusti, non per lei,
90  ma per colui che siede, che traligna,

91  Not to dispense or two or three for six,
92  Not any fortune of first vacancy,
93  'Non decimas quae sunt pauperum Dei,'

91  non dispensare o due o tre per sei,
92  non la fortuna di prima vacante,
93  non decimas, quae sunt pauperum Dei,

94  He asked for, but against the errant world
95  Permission to do battle for the seed,
96  Of which these four and twenty plants surround thee.

94  addimandò, ma contro al mondo errante
95  licenza di combatter per lo seme
96  del qual ti fascian ventiquattro piante.

97  Then with the doctrine and the will together,
98  With office apostolical he moved,
99  Like torrent which some lofty vein out-presses;

97  Poi, con dottrina e con volere insieme,
98  con l'officio appostolico si mosse
99  quasi torrente ch'alta vena preme;

100  And in among the shoots heretical
101  His impetus with greater fury smote,
102  Wherever the resistance was the greatest.

100  e ne li sterpi eretici percosse
101  l'impeto suo, più vivamente quivi
102  dove le resistenze eran più grosse.

103  Of him were made thereafter divers runnels,
104  Whereby the garden catholic is watered,
105  So that more living its plantations stand.

103  Di lui si fecer poi diversi rivi
104  onde l'orto catolico si riga,
105  sì che i suoi arbuscelli stan più vivi.

106  If such the one wheel of the Biga was,
107  In which the Holy Church itself defended
108  And in the field its civic battle won,

106  Se tal fu l'una rota de la biga
107  in che la Santa Chiesa si difese
108  e vinse in campo la sua civil briga,

109  Truly full manifest should be to thee
110  The excellence of the other, unto whom
111  Thomas so courteous was before my coming.

109  ben ti dovrebbe assai esser palese
110  l'eccellenza de l'altra, di cui Tomma
111  dinanzi al mio venir fu sì cortese.

112  But still the orbit, which the highest part
113  Of its circumference made, is derelict,
114  So that the mould is where was once the crust.

112  Ma l'orbita che fé la parte somma
113  di sua circunferenza, è derelitta,
114  sì ch'è la muffa dov' era la gromma.

115  His family, that had straight forward moved
116  With feet upon his footprints, are turned round
117  So that they set the point upon the heel.

115  La sua famiglia, che si mosse dritta
116  coi piedi a le sue orme, è tanto volta,
117  che quel dinanzi a quel di retro gitta;

118  And soon aware they will be of the harvest
119  Of this bad husbandry, when shall the tares
120  Complain the granary is taken from them.

118  e tosto si vedrà de la ricolta
119  de la mala coltura, quando il loglio
120  si lagnerà che l'arca li sia tolta.

121  Yet say I, he who searcheth leaf by leaf
122  Our volume through, would still some page discover
123  Where he could read, 'I am as I am wont.'

121  Ben dico, chi cercasse a foglio a foglio
122  nostro volume, ancor troveria carta
123  u' leggerebbe 'I' mi son quel ch'i' soglio';

124  'Twill not be from Casal nor Acquasparta,
125  From whence come such unto the written word
126  That one avoids it, and the other narrows.

124  ma non fia da Casal né d'Acquasparta,
125  là onde vegnon tali a la scrittura,
126  ch'uno la fugge e altro la coarta.

127  Bonaventura of Bagnoregio's life
128  Am I, who always in great offices
129  Postponed considerations sinister.

127  Io son la vita di Bonaventura
128  da Bagnoregio, che ne' grandi offici
129  sempre pospuosi la sinistra cura.

130  Here are Illuminato and Agostino,
131  Who of the first barefooted beggars were
132  That with the cord the friends of God became.

130  Illuminato e Augustin son quici,
131  che fuor de' primi scalzi poverelli
132  che nel capestro a Dio si fero amici.

133  Hugh of Saint Victor is among them here,
134  And Peter Mangiador, and Peter of Spain,
135  Who down below in volumes twelve is shining;

133  Ugo da San Vittore è qui con elli,
134  e Pietro Mangiadore e Pietro Spano,
134  lo qual giù luce in dodici libelli;

136  Nathan the seer, and metropolitan
137  Chrysostom, and Anselmus, and Donatus
138  Who deigned to lay his hand to the first art;

136  Natàn profeta e 'l metropolitano
137  Crisostomo e Anselmo e quel Donato
138  ch'a la prim' arte degnò porre mano.

139  Here is Rabanus, and beside me here
140  Shines the Calabrian Abbot Joachim,
141  He with the spirit of prophecy endowed.

139  Rabano è qui, e lucemi dallato
140  il calavrese abate Giovacchino
141  di spirito profetico dotato.

142  To celebrate so great a paladin
143  Have moved me the impassioned courtesy
144  And the discreet discourses of Friar Thomas,

142  Ad inveggiar cotanto paladino
143  mi mosse l'infiammata cortesia
144  di fra Tommaso e 'l discreto latino;

145  And with me they have moved this company."

145  e mosse meco questa compagnia.”

Canto XIII
The Nine Orders of Angels (plus God: Primum Mobile) equal the decad) in ascending order
Liberal Arts
Trivium
Angels — Moon — Grammar
Archangels — Mercury — Dialectic
Thrones — Venus — Rhetoric
Quadrivium
Dominions — Sun — Arithmetic
Virtues— Mars — Music
Principalities — Jupiter — Geometry
Powers — Saturn — Astrology

Philosophy
Cherubim
Seraphim

God, Primum Mobile (Inclusive of them all).

The world is beautiful in something like the way it is mathematical.  Neither aesthetic or mathematical experience exist prior to humans.  But these inventions succeed because they map form, symmetry, harmony, distribution of patterns, causal interrelationships, order, unity, and diversity, discovered to actually be there.

Holmes Rolston III,
"Landscape: Landscape from the Eighteenth Century to the Present."
Encyclopedia of Aesthetics, Volume 3, page 96.



We should not forget that these canti in the domain of the sun are in the domain arithmetic and of the angelic realm of Dominions.  Dante's numbers are allegoric, just as are the mathematics of contemporary physicists.  They are indicators of relationships between the human mind "in-here" and whatever is "out there" in the cosmos.  From one perspective, numbers, and we have a lot of them in these sun-canti, 24, 12, 6, 5 (Solomon) 15, 9, 7, 2, 1, etc., and especially 3.  Like Buckminster Fuller, Dante builds his universe on the concept of triangularities, which remain ever present as the rock solid (verse 3, here) stability of the poem.  We might argue that the appeal of numbers is precisely that they are stripped of all qualia, and like the universal embrace of the sun, an emblem of God's love, they cannot be besmirched by concepts of pain and pleasure, good and evil, beautiful or ugly.  The temporal senses cannot subject them to the subjectivity of judgement.  Our assessment of some formula might be incorrect, but that does not make mathematical or even cabbalistic formulation morally wrong.  Like God, the mysteries of numbers can be logically probed, in fact they are the quintessential paradigms of logic, but they can never be — since their existence infinite — reduced to mere ratiocination — they are, in the Jungian sense, irrational, that is, reasonable, but beyond reason.  To turn the imagination loose, as Dante explicitly does here in the opening verses, with the magical invocation of "imagini" three times repeated, is to set the human mind free to explore and absorb the infinitude of the Divine.  The canto loops back to an open question left hanging in Canto XI regarding Solomon's wisdom, and entirely reframes a statement that seemed absolute, that is, that none have been or ever will be greater exemplars of wisdom than was Solomon, to something that is made relative by changing the context.  This same shifting of values occurs in numbers with the idea of greater than/less than.  For example, the number 5 is greater than 4, but less than 6, but these relative values can also be permanently fixed.  And by allowing Thomas Aquinas to re-evaluate the position of Solomon's wisdom in the context of the prelapsarian Adam and redemptive figure of Christ, this wider context of proportionality as a principle is established as an absolute, although our understanding of the implications of this principle will always be relative and always subject to recontextualization.   The canto begins with a long set of what amounts to an instruction manual on how to apply these realizations to the reading of not only this canto, but to the poem as a whole.  This canto makes it clear at the very beginning (I say what you see), in which two monologues are distinctly present.  One is the monologue of the poet to the reader, two characters outside the poem, the other is the monologue of Thomas Aquinas and the aspirant protagonist inside the poem.  The long opening gambit the reader is Dante's maneuver to unite these two worlds.  This has the effect of injecting the imaginal world of Dante's Paradise into the "real" world of the reader's temporal experience.  In fact, it has the effect of reversing the object/reflection argument presented in the previous canti, from the usual sensory experience of the temporal, mortal world as that which is real, and the imaginative world as a reflection.  This device creates a vertigo which leads to the Experience that there is a REALITY of IDEATIONAL, IMAGINAL OBJECTIVITY which makes the mutable, perishable entities of the mortal world an ephemeral reflection.  In brief, if we follow the text's instructions, we too will find ourselves in Paradise, and are therein prepared to receive the instruction of the saint.  How is that possible?  It is made possible because we have already received the instruction of the poet.  

Thomas' exposition tells the aspirant protagonist Dante WHAT to think, or how to resolve an apparent, particular theological/philosophic paradox, but the diachronic poet, Dante, in these opening lines, tells us HOW to think.  Dante, the poet, here, is making a claim that poetry — for which one synonym is "numbers" — is superior to theology and philosophy because imagination allows us to not only probe the meanings of those two endeavors, but to contextualize them in this aesthetic sphere which encloses the theologic and the philosophic and arranges their contextualized values.  Imagine one of those toy spheres containing a little landscape in a solute filled with little particles meant to simulate snowflakes.  When we shake this toy, the flakes swirl around, constantly changing their positions relative to one another.  Poetry, because it can present both the qualia of experience in language and the mathematical abstracts of its own formal structures (terza rime, here), is the Word of God.  This is THE WORD which births the cosmos.  Theologians and philosophers merely observe and study it, contesting with one another as to which of their observations are the orthodox, logical, or correct ones.  Poetry is a sun that shines its light upon these observations, but is all inclusive, the aesthetic realm it establishes may make judgements, indulge in mathematics and theology, but is itself beyond the things whose qualities it determines.  The influence of poetry, however, is not like that of a king or a politician, whose power might be analogous to the power of the ego in waking consciousness.  Poetry's influence is subtle, and almost invisible to the mere candle flicker of the ego.  Solomon realizes this in his dream, when he is wise enough to ask for wisdom, and not more political power.  He puts his ego desire for power under the authority of that which is the progenitor and interpreter of power, and as such, his wisdom, comes from an atemporal realm, that atemporal perfect template which was innate in Adam and Jesus, and did not have to be sought, observed, studied, or argued about.  Though in many ways Solomon remain disastrously fallible as a king, an ego, in this aspect of wisdom, gifted to him through this infallible domain, his gift could not by definition ever be surpassed, although his ego behaviors still retained their faults and foibles, some of which proved to be fatal to his roles as king, lover, and father.  Solomon's case for inclusion in Paradise is a paradoxical one based upon how his moral failures as a sexual profligate and inept exemplar as a father and king have been redeemed because he is the poet of the Song of Songs.  In general, this is also the path of the Commedia, which in the Inferno we see as a contraction to a point of pain and paralysis, which finally opens into the starry heavens (also seen in this canto), and which in the Purgatorio is a contraction of the dissipations of sin, culminating in a liberation into Paradise.  These two follow the same movement as the birth contractions which drive the foetus through the dangerous narrow portal of the vagina to its birth into the finite sphere of an independent existence.  This movement is ever present, but mostly covertly hidden, and its most hidden permutations is what Walter Arensberg, in his book, The Cryptography of Dante, tracks in his chapter entitled "The Seal."  The gist of this is that Dante's work has both overtly and covertly (through cryptograms) made of his poem both in content and process, a linguistic embodiment of sexual intercourse, sexual organs, birth, and finally a release from the temporal domain which is rife with pain and death, and the slavish servitude to the body.  Dante's "seal", his emblem and motto is the Latin Peremas: which means, as according to Arensberg, and as far as I have been able to determine, "to withhold" or to "hinder."  The poem itself represents a withdrawal from the Created world of sexual reproduction and temporal mortality to the aesthetic world of the poem.  Is this true?  If it is true, and that is a part of his overall endeavor, than aesthetics is the ground where the soul can fight for and achieve a release from a fallen physical world.  I don't know if this is true, but it is a legitimate question, and the artifact, or should we say organism, of the Commedia, provides, if not a definitive answer, a plausible one. 

In temporal, physical life, sexuality, and eating, have both a necessary function and a pleasure function.  But that which is a necessity for the ephemeral life of the body, is not a necessity for the life of the soul, and these effluents of pleasure — all that's sublime or transcendent — these are the necessities for what might be called the atemporal physiology of the soul.  What Dante is exploring ever more intensely as he ascends through the spheres of paradise are the domains of idealization, ideas, whose bodily components are the métier of philosophers and theologians, just as anatomy is the study required for the understanding of the physical body.   The anatomist parses the body ever more finely and minutely, and likewise the scholastic theologian and philosopher parses ideas ever more finely and minutely.  These metaphysical inquiries, as Dante reminds us in this canto are not necessary and may even be a hindrance to the conduct of everyday, temporal life.  Their practice is impractical.  But let's remember what Blake said: 

The Infant Joy is beautiful, but its anatomy
Horrible ghast & deadly! nought shalt thou find in it
But dark despair & everlasting brooding melancholy!

The joy of poetry may not be practical,  but aside from mundane accounting functions, neither is mathematics.  We don't need a mathematical description of the moon's phases to see how those phases affect the tides and the tides of human emotion.  And yet both poetry and higher mathematics are aesthetic necessities for any truth which stays true across all contexts.  Dante is not writing history, he is showing us that the anatomy of soul and the anatomy of the poem have an aesthetic immortality, not subject to the corruption and death of that which is merely physical.  As Unamuno has shown us, the restriction of our existences without a corresponding view of that which is immortal can only lead to a tragic sense of life.  The Commedia is not that, even in the Inferno, and it has become the Divine Comedy because it affirms in every life situation of an ensouled human, that which contains, animates, and transcends physical mortality.  It is not Darwin's survival of the fittest, which is true enough in the context of physical life, but Darwin's wife's survival of the most devout, which is affirmed here.  And this is a sense that has been lost to the modern materialist, and I would assert cannot ever be regained by the literalist material explanations of science, nor can such explanations explain or explain away the persistence of aesthetics in the lives of human beings.  The body cannot live without food, cannot propagate without sex, but the soul cannot live without imagination.  And from the most depraved to the most exulted, human life is dominated, even more than by food and sex, by the imaginative auras which emanate from, infuse, sustain, and create them.  This is where Schopenhauer got it wrong, he did not go far enough in his quite accurate assessment of physical human life.  He did not understand that what kept him alive as a man was his life as a philosopher, and that life was always evolving toward bliss, even if that bliss was primarily concerned with painful explanations.  For Dante, a lover of physical life, politics, philosophy, and theology, seems to have the realization that none of these had the power to save him, or even to explain to him, why he should love these imperfect, damaging, and ultimately death-dealing domains.  What he does seem to see as that which had the power to transform these entities and to transcend them, is poetry. 

1  Let him imagine, who would well conceive
2  What now I saw, and let him while I speak
3  Retain the image as a steadfast rock,

1  Imagini, chi bene intender cupe
2  quel ch'i' or vidi – e ritegna l'image,
3  mentre ch'io dico, come ferma rupe –,

4  The fifteen stars, that in their divers regions
5  The sky enliven with a light so great
6  That it transcends all clusters of the air;

4  quindici stelle che 'n diverse plage
5  lo cielo avvivan di tanto sereno
6  che soperchia de l'aere ogne compage;

7  Let him the Wain imagine unto which
8  Our vault of heaven sufficeth night and day,
9  So that in turning of its pole it fails not;

7  imagini quel carro a cu' il seno
8  basta del nostro cielo e notte e giorno,
9  sì ch'al volger del temo non vien meno;

10  Let him the mouth imagine of the horn
11  That in the point beginneth of the axis
12  Round about which the primal wheel revolves,—

10  imagini la bocca di quel corno
11  che si comincia in punta de lo stelo
12  a cui la prima rota va dintorno,

13  To have fashioned of themselves two signs in heaven,
14  Like unto that which Minos' daughter made,
15  The moment when she felt the frost of death;

13  aver fatto di sé due segni in cielo,
14  qual fece la figliuola di Minoi
15  allora che sentì di morte il gelo;

16  And one to have its rays within the other,
17  And both to whirl themselves in such a manner
18  That one should forward go, the other backward;

16  e l'un ne l'altro aver li raggi suoi,
17  e amendue girarsi per maniera
18  che l'uno andasse al primo e l'altro al poi;

19  And he will have some shadowing forth of that
20  True constellation and the double dance
21  That circled round the point at which I was;

19  e avrà quasi l'ombra de la vera
20  costellazione e de la doppia danza
21  che circulava il punto dov' io era:

22  Because it is as much beyond our wont,
23  As swifter than the motion of the Chiana
24  Moveth the heaven that all the rest outspeeds.

22  poi ch'è tanto di là da nostra usanza,
23  quanto di là dal mover de la Chiana
24  si move il ciel che tutti li altri avanza.

25  There sang they neither Bacchus, nor Apollo,
26  But in the divine nature Persons three,
27  And in one person the divine and human.

25  Lì si cantò non Bacco, non Peana,
26  ma tre persone in divina natura,
27  e in una persona essa e l'umana.

28  The singing and the dance fulfilled their measure,
29  And unto us those holy lights gave need,
30  Growing in happiness from care to care.

28  Compié 'l cantare e 'l volger sua misura;
29  e attesersi a noi quei santi lumi,
30  felicitando sé di cura in cura.

31  Then broke the silence of those saints concordant
32  The light in which the admirable life
33  Of God's own mendicant was told to me,

31  Ruppe il silenzio ne' concordi numi
32  poscia la luce in che mirabil vita
33  del poverel di Dio narrata fumi,

34  And said: "Now that one straw is trodden out
35  Now that its seed is garnered up already,
36  Sweet love invites me to thresh out the other.

34  e disse: “Quando l'una paglia è trita,
35  quando la sua semenza è già riposta,
36  a batter l'altra dolce amor m'invita.

37  Into that bosom, thou believest, whence
38  Was drawn the rib to form the beauteous cheek
39  Whose taste to all the world is costing dear,

37  Tu credi che nel petto onde la costa
38  si trasse per formar la bella guancia
39  il cui palato a tutto 'l mondo costa,

40  And into that which, by the lance transfixed,
41  Before and since, such satisfaction made
42  That it weighs down the balance of all sin,

40  e in quel che, forato da la lancia,
41  e prima e poscia tanto sodisfece,
42  che d'ogne colpa vince la bilancia,

43  Whate'er of light it has to human nature
44  Been lawful to possess was all infused
45  By the same power that both of them created;

43  quantunque a la natura umana lece
44  aver di lume, tutto fosse infuso
45  da quel valor che l'uno e l'altro fece;

45  And hence at what I said above dost wonder,
47  When I narrated that no second had
48  The good which in the fifth light is enclosed.

46  e però miri a ciò ch'io dissi suso,
47  quando narrai che non ebbe 'l secondo
48  lo ben che ne la quinta luce è chiuso.

49  Now ope thine eyes to what I answer thee,
50  And thou shalt see thy creed and my discourse
51  Fit in the truth as centre in a circle.

49  Or apri li occhi a quel ch'io ti rispondo,
50  e vedräi il tuo credere e 'l mio dire
51  nel vero farsi come centro in tondo.

52  That which can die, and that which dieth not,
53  Are nothing but the splendour of the idea
54  Which by his love our Lord brings into being;

52  Ciò che non more e ciò che può morire
53  non è se non splendor di quella idea
54  che partorisce, amando, il nostro Sire;

55  Because that living Light, which from its fount
56  Effulgent flows, so that it disunites not
57  From Him nor from the Love in them intrined,

55  ché quella viva luce che sì mea
56  dal suo lucente, che non si disuna
57  da lui né da l'amor ch'a lor s'intrea,

58  Through its own goodness reunites its rays
59  In nine subsistences, as in a mirror,
60  Itself eternally remaining One.

58  per sua bontate il suo raggiare aduna,
59  quasi specchiato, in nove sussistenze,
60  etternalmente rimanendosi una.

61  Thence it descends to the last potencies,
62  Downward from act to act becoming such
63  That only brief contingencies it makes;

61  Quindi discende a l'ultime potenze
62  giù d'atto in atto, tanto divenendo,
63  che più non fa che brevi contingenze;

64  And these contingencies I hold to be
65  Things generated, which the heaven produces
66  By its own motion, with seed and without.

64  e queste contingenze essere intendo
65  le cose generate, che produce
66  con seme e sanza seme il ciel movendo.

67  Neither their wax, nor that which tempers it,
68  Remains immutable, and hence beneath
69  The ideal signet more and less shines through;

67  La cera di costoro e chi la duce
68  non sta d'un modo; e però sotto 'l segno
69  idëale poi più e men traluce.

70  Therefore it happens, that the selfsame tree
71  After its kind bears worse and better fruit,
72  And ye are born with characters diverse.

70  Ond' elli avvien ch'un medesimo legno,
71  secondo specie, meglio e peggio frutta;
72  e voi nascete con diverso ingegno.

73  If in perfection tempered were the wax,
74  And were the heaven in its supremest virtue,
75  The brilliance of the seal would all appear;

73  Se fosse a punto la cera dedutta
74  e fosse il cielo in sua virtù supprema,
75  la luce del suggel parrebbe tutta;

76  But nature gives it evermore deficient,
77  In the like manner working as the artist,
78  Who has the skill of art and hand that trembles.

76  ma la natura la dà sempre scema,
77  similemente operando a l'artista
78  ch'a l'abito de l'arte ha man che trema.

79  If then the fervent Love, the Vision clear,
80    Of primal Virtue do dispose and seal,
81  Perfection absolute is there acquired.

79  Però se 'l caldo amor la chiara vista
80  de la prima virtù dispone e segna,
81  tutta la perfezion quivi s'acquista.

82  Thus was of old the earth created worthy
83  Of all and every animal perfection;
84  And thus the Virgin was impregnate made;

82  Così fu fatta già la terra degna
83  di tutta l'animal perfezïone;
84  così fu fatta la Vergine pregna;

85  So that thine own opinion I commend,
86  That human nature never yet has been,
87  Nor will be, what it was in those two persons.

85  sì ch'io commendo tua oppinïone,
86  che l'umana natura mai non fue
87  né fia qual fu in quelle due persone.

88  Now if no farther forth I should proceed,
89  'Then in what way was he without a peer?'
90  Would be the first beginning of thy words.

88  Or s'i' non procedesse avanti piùe,
89  'Dunque, come costui fu sanza pare?'
90  comincerebber le parole tue.

91  But, that may well appear what now appears not,
92  Think who he was, and what occasion moved him
93  To make request, when it was told him, 'Ask.'

91  Ma perché paia ben ciò che non pare,
92  pensa chi era, e la cagion che 'l mosse,
93  quando fu detto 'Chiedi,' a dimandare.

94  I've not so spoken that thou canst not see
95  Clearly he was a king who asked for wisdom,
96  That he might be sufficiently a king;

94  Non ho parlato sì, che tu non posse
95  ben veder ch'el fu re, che chiese senno
96  acciò che re sufficïente fosse;

97  'Twas not to know the number in which are
98  The motors here above, or if 'necesse'
99  With a contingent e'er 'necesse' make,

97  non per sapere il numero in che enno
98  li motor di qua sù, o se necesse
99  con contingente mai necesse fenno;

100  'Non si est dare primum motum esse,'
101   Or if in semicircle can be made
102  Triangle so that it have no right angle.

100  non si est dare primum motum esse,
101  o se del mezzo cerchio far si puote
102  trïangol sì ch'un retto non avesse.

103  Whence, if thou notest this and what I said,
104  A regal prudence is that peerless seeing
105  In which the shaft of my intention strikes.

103  Onde, se ciò ch'io dissi e questo note,
104  regal prudenza è quel vedere impari
105  in che lo stral di mia intenzion percuote;

106  And if on 'rose' thou turnest thy clear eyes,
107  Thou'lt see that it has reference alone
108  To kings who're many, and the good are rare.

106  e se al 'surse' drizzi li occhi chiari,
107  vedrai aver solamente respetto
108  ai regi, che son molti, e ' buon son rari.

109  With this distinction take thou what I said,
110  And thus it can consist with thy belief
111  Of the first father and of our Delight.

109  Con questa distinzion prendi 'l mio detto;
110  e così puote star con quel che credi
111  del primo padre e del nostro Diletto.

112  And lead shall this be always to thy feet,
113  To make thee, like a weary man, move slowly
114  Both to the Yes and No thou seest not;

112  E questo ti sia sempre piombo a' piedi,
113  per farti mover lento com' uom lasso
114  e al sì e al no che tu non vedi:

115  For very low among the fools is he
116  Who affirms without distinction, or denies,
117  As well in one as in the other case;

115  ché quelli è tra li stolti bene a basso,
116  che sanza distinzione afferma e nega
117  ne l'un così come ne l'altro passo;

118  Because it happens that full often bends
119  Current opinion in the false direction,
120  And then the feelings bind the intellect.

118  perch' elli 'ncontra che più volte piega
119  l'oppinïon corrente in falsa parte,
120  e poi l'affetto l'intelletto lega.

121  Far more than uselessly he leaves the shore,
122  (Since he returneth not the same he went,)
123  Who fishes for the truth, and has no skill;

121  Vie più che 'ndarno da riva si parte,
122  perché non torna tal qual e' si move,
123  chi pesca per lo vero e non ha l'arte.

124  And in the world proofs manifest thereof
125  Parmenides, Melissus, Brissus are,
126  And many who went on and knew not whither;

124  E di ciò sono al mondo aperte prove
125  Parmenide, Melisso e Brisso e molti,
126  li quali andaro e non sapëan dove;

127  Thus did Sabellius, Arius, and those fools
128  Who have been even as swords unto the Scriptures
129  In rendering distorted their straight faces.

127  sì fé Sabellio e Arrio e quelli stolti
128  che furon come spade a le Scritture
129  in render torti li diritti volti.

130  Nor yet shall people be too confident
131  In judging, even as he is who doth count
132  The corn in field or ever it be ripe.

130  Non sien le genti, ancor, troppo sicure
131  a giudicar, sì come quei che stima
132  le biade in campo pria che sien mature;

133  For I have seen all winter long the thorn
134  First show itself intractable and fierce,
135  And after bear the rose upon its top;

133  ch'i' ho veduto tutto 'l verno prima
134  lo prun mostrarsi rigido e feroce,
135  poscia portar la rosa in su la cima;

136  And I have seen a ship direct and swift
137  Run o'er the sea throughout its course entire,
138  To perish at the harbour's mouth at last.

136  e legno vidi già dritto e veloce
137  correr lo mar per tutto suo cammino,
138  perire al fine a l'intrar de la foce.

139  Let not Dame Bertha nor Ser Martin think,
140  Seeing one steal, another offering make,
141  To see them in the arbitrament divine;

139  Non creda donna Berta e ser Martino,
140  per vedere un furare, altro offerere,
141 ché quel può surgere, e quel può cadere.”

142  For one may rise, and fall the other may."

142  ché quel può surgere, e quel può cadere.”

Canto XIV
The heaven of Mars may be compared to music because of two properties: one is its most beautiful relation, for in counting the moving heavens, from whichever we begin, whether from the lowest or the highest, this heaven of Mars is the fifth and the middlemost of them all, that is, of the first, second, third, and fourth pairs. The other, as Ptolemy says in the Quadripartitus, is that Mars dries things out and incinerates them because its heat is like that of fire; and this is why it appears fiery in color, sometimes more and sometimes less, according to the density or rarity of the vapors which accompany it, which often ignite by themselves, as is established in the first book of Meteorics.  For this reason Albumassar says that the ignition of these vapors signifies the death of kings and the changing of kingdoms, because they are effects of the lordship of Mars, and this is why Seneca says that at the death of the Emperor Augustus he saw on high a ball of fire. This is also why in Florence, at the beginning of its ruin, there was seen in the sky in the shape of a cross a great quantity of these vapors which accompany the star of Mars. And these two properties are found in Music, which consists entirely of relations, as we see in harmonized words and in songs, whose harmony is so much the sweeter the more the relation is beautiful, which relation is the principal beauty in this science, because it is its principal aim. Moreover, Music attracts to itself the human spirits, which are, as it were, principally vapors of the heart, so that they almost completely cease their activity; this happens likewise to the entire soul when it hears music, and the virtue of all of them, as it were, runs to the spirit of sense which receives the sound.

The Convivio, Book II, Chapter 13

If one were describing the electromagnetic waves which travel across the brain and not water in a vase, these first three verses of Canto XIV might not be inapt.  All through these sun canti Dante is playing with circular and elliptical movements, and, if we might speculate, it is as if in the depths of his meditation/imaginings, he is able to see those holographic interference patterns from which existence arises.  I takes these observations not as the mechanistic truths of 21st Century science, but as metaphoric — which may be the only way to really get to the heart of them.  They seem to be statements about consciousness.  Always I am stunned by Dante's prescience.  However far the reader proceeds in penetrating these texts with her or his own insights, Dante's insights, like lights in a darkness, are always already beyond, shimmering, beckoning.  I had hoped as I proceeded in the text, that when I reached the Paradiso, after having been educated in Dante's cosmology and poetry by reading the first two canticles, that I would be having an easier time of it.  I'm not.  But I don't think that is solely because of any technical deficiencies I have in applying myself to the poetry.  No, rather, the insights that Dante presents are addressed to a person who must have certain of those same insights in order to have a receptacle for the kinds of experiences that Dante is expressing.  All this seemingly arcane excursion into Medieval theology, which seem so irrelevant, perhaps even historically passé and naive to the 21st Century reader, must be slipped into, fitting like a glove around one's own thought, so to speak, before this particular state of consciousness can be experienced.  Like the protagonist Dante, who, like some conscious remote operating vehicle of the poet living outside the poem, we must slip into the center of these circling/countercircling singing/dancing entities with this anima/muse as our guide.  Beatrice here, not only reads Dante's mind, she reads that portion of his mind that has yet to evolve in the future.  Her statement here is not therefore solely about the state of mind of her ward and chela, it is about MIND, in all caps, the MIND that creates space/time and therefore embodies an omnipresence synonymous with omniscience.  For a 21st Century reader the very possibility of such a MIND is flabbergasting, an historical relic, an impossibility, and yet, if we begin to adopt the parameters of a belief system that Dante tells us are the necessary criteria for the kind of transcendent experience expressed in and through the poem, then we too will experience MIND in this fantastical way.  Dante, the poet, is saying, through all this seemingly arcane theology is: If you are to have this experience, the philosophy is the hallucinogen you must take in order for my psychedelia to engulf you.  This is a deep, deep psychic pilgrimage, whose kaleidoscopic arrays of historical figures, mythological and angelic entities, geographical locales, and celestial configurations become the reader's new parameters of mind, and the questions about the dimensions of these new parameters are Dante's (the protagonist, aspirant) questions.  The question that needs to be answered if that protagonist/aspirant is going to continue to ascend in this transitional canto between the Sun's arithmetical dimensions (given a parting shot here in verses 27 -30 about the trinity) and the music that is manifested in the sphere of Mars is this stark one: How can even the fully spirit-saturated mind of even a great saint, in the joyous spinning and brilliant depths of its deepest meditations, possibly turn its attention to the temporal, decaying cadaver of its former physical self?  These two visions, that of spiritual exhilaration and that of the dead, putrefying corruption could not be further apart.  In fact, they are so far apart that they seem not to be able to co-exist in the same universe, one or the other of them must be illusory, and in the 21st Century we have chosen the latter as the real, and the former as the illusion.  The allure of this poem in all its musical, mathematical, and metaphorical splendor is that it is telling us this: In order to experience the ultimate ecstasy, you cannot have these worlds in any kind of opposition to one another which affirms one as authentic and the other as fantasy, both exist right here and right now in the physical sound- and-meaning-body of this poem, and that is the philosophical/poetical MIND that you must inhabit if you want the "proof," which is only available within the ever-expanding parameters of this belief system.  Yet, the phrase "belief system" that I've used here is but a bridge to help my 21st century mind move into the ENTITY of universal MIND that Dante has been proposing all along.  How easy the protagonist and his beatific muse, Beatrice, ascend here from the transcendence of the Sun to the wider, deeper transcendence of Mars!  This protagonist is so enraptured by the Sun sphere, that he hardly notices that he has ascended to an even more enthralling rapture.  And how hard it is for the 21st century mind to accept the grace of this Cosmic MIND.  When Eliot says that "we had the experience, but we missed the meaning," he seems to be referring to this terrible entrapment of the cadaver-mind that we have chosen to accept as real.  Inside the mortal, brain there can be no more than temporary exultations, never Eternal ones, and the question that Beatrice foresees in her chela's future frames that dilemma profoundly.  To make any form stable enough to exist, let alone Eternally exist, it cannot be tainted with temporality, therefore a new resurrected body is not only a necessity for our future, but a necessity if we are going to have a future.  In verses 73-75, the pilgrim's body and his bodily organs of perception are undergoing this temporal passage from the two contrary-revolving spheres to a third motion beyond them and encompassing them.  This is a circling, all of whose boundaries are but provisional states of joy.  But their states, their templates, as Blake says, are permanent, so that they may be experienced, but they then widen unto greater states of joy, the greater states not obliterating the lesser, but incorporating them in ever-renewed, ever more perceptually potent bodies, bodies that are aesthetic, poetic, and musical, bodies that are capable of utilizing the temporal, historical, and physical as the ecstatic fuel of an hallucinogenic communion wafer whose assimilation allows us to experience Universal MIND: "The true incandescence of the Holy Breath."  Such a vision is needed to reorganize the temporally oriented mind, whose experiences all end in obliteration.  Such a vision triggers the sudden infusion of a new language.  And this is what happens to Dante, the aspirant, here.  His temporal memory is brightened-out, and he begins to speak in tongues.  A new galaxy, compared to the Milky Way, appears as the new permeable and expanding boundary of the transformed belief "system," a galaxy that baffles all the temporal understandings of the wisest of mortal sages, and in which the opposites of the temporal and the eternal appear as a flaming cross that Christs both Heaven and Earth.  The old cloddish beliefs are granulated into the atoms of the everlasting, and the poet compares these new entity-atoms to motes of light spinning in a shaft of sun.  But these motes are notes, notes of a transcendent music, the music of a love song, which, returning to the union of Dante and Beatrice here, remind the reader that the whole of the Divina Commedia is a love song.   


1  From centre unto rim, from rim to centre,
2  In a round vase the water moves itself,
3  As from without 'tis struck or from within.

1  Dal centro al cerchio, e sì dal cerchio al centro
2  movesi l'acqua in un ritondo vaso,
3  secondo ch'è percosso fuori o dentro:

4  Into my mind upon a sudden dropped
5  What I am saying, at the moment when
6  Silent became the glorious life of Thomas,

4  ne la mia mente fé sùbito caso
5  questo ch'io dico, sì come si tacque
6  la glorïosa vita di Tommaso,

7  Because of the resemblance that was born
8  Of his discourse and that of Beatrice,
9  Whom, after him, it pleased thus to begin:

7  per la similitudine che nacque
8  del suo parlare e di quel di Beatrice,
9  a cui sì cominciar, dopo lui, piacque:

10  "This man has need (and does not tell you so,
11   Nor with the voice, nor even in his thought)
12   Of going to the root of one truth more.

10  “A costui fa mestieri, e nol vi dice
11  né con la voce né pensando ancora,
12  d'un altro vero andare a la radice.

13  Declare unto him if the light wherewith
14   Blossoms your substance shall remain with you
15   Eternally the same that it is now;

13  Diteli se la luce onde s'infiora
14  vostra sustanza, rimarrà con voi
15  etternalmente sì com' ell' è ora;

16  And if it do remain, say in what manner,
17  After ye are again made visible,
18  It can be that it injure not your sight."

16  e se rimane, dite come, poi
17  che sarete visibili rifatti,
18  esser porà ch'al veder non vi nòi.”

19  As by a greater gladness urged and drawn
20  They who are dancing in a ring sometimes
21  Uplift their voices and their motions quicken;

19  Come, da più letizia pinti e tratti,
20  a la fiata quei che vanno a rota
21  levan la voce e rallegrano li atti

22  So, at that orison devout and prompt,
23  The holy circles a new joy displayed
24  In their revolving and their wondrous song.

22  così, a l'orazion pronta e divota,
23  li santi cerchi mostrar nova gioia
24  nel torneare e ne la mira nota.

25  Whoso lamenteth him that here we die
26  That we may live above, has never there
27  Seen the refreshment of the eternal rain.

25  Qual si lamenta perché qui si moia
26  per viver colà sù, non vide quive
27  lo refrigerio de l'etterna ploia.

28  The One and Two and Three who ever liveth,
29  And reigneth ever in Three and Two and One,
30  Not circumscribed and all things circumscribing,

28  Quell' uno e due e tre che sempre vive
29  e regna sempre in tre e 'n due e 'n uno,
30  non circunscritto, e tutto circunscrive,

31  Three several times was chanted by each one
32  Among those spirits, with such melody
33  That for all merit it were just reward;

31  tre volte era cantato da ciascuno
32  di quelli spiriti con tal melodia,
33  ch'ad ogne merto saria giusto muno.

34  And, in the lustre most divine of all
35  The lesser ring, I heard a modest voice,
36  Such as perhaps the Angel's was to Mary,

34  E io udi' ne la luce più dia
35  del minor cerchio una voce modesta,
36  forse qual fu da l'angelo a Maria,

37  Answer: "As long as the festivity
38  Of Paradise shall be, so long our love
39  Shall radiate round about us such a vesture.

37  risponder: “Quanto fia lunga la festa
38  di paradiso, tanto il nostro amore
39  si raggerà dintorno cotal vesta.

40  Its brightness is proportioned to the ardour,
41  The ardour to the vision; and the vision
42  Equals what grace it has above its worth.

40  La sua chiarezza séguita l'ardore;
41  l'ardor la visïone, e quella è tanta,
42  quant' ha di grazia sovra suo valore.

43  When, glorious and sanctified, our flesh
44  Is reassumed, then shall our persons be
45  More pleasing by their being all complete;

43  Come la carne glorïosa e santa
44  fia rivestita, la nostra persona
45  più grata fia per esser tutta quanta;

46  For will increase whate'er bestows on us
47  Of light gratuitous the Good Supreme,
48  Light which enables us to look on Him;

46  per che s'accrescerà ciò che ne dona
47  di gratüito lume il sommo bene,
48  lume ch'a lui veder ne condiziona;

49  Therefore the vision must perforce increase,
50  Increase the ardour which from that is kindled,
51  Increase the radiance which from this proceeds.

49  onde la visïon crescer convene,
50  crescer l'ardor che di quella s'accende,
51  crescer lo raggio che da esso vene.

52  But even as a coal that sends forth flame,
53  And by its vivid whiteness overpowers it
54  So that its own appearance it maintains,

52  Ma sì come carbon che fiamma rende,
53  e per vivo candor quella soverchia,
54  sì che la sua parvenza si difende;

55  Thus the effulgence that surrounds us now
56  Shall be o'erpowered in aspect by the flesh,
57  Which still to-day the earth doth cover up;

55  così questo folgór che già ne cerchia
56  fia vinto in apparenza da la carne
57  che tutto dì la terra ricoperchia;

58  Nor can so great a splendour weary us,
59  For strong will be the organs of the body
60  To everything which hath the power to please us."

58  né potrà tanta luce affaticarne:
59  ché li organi del corpo saran forti
60  a tutto ciò che potrà dilettarne.”

61  So sudden and alert appeared to me
62  Both one and the other choir to say Amen,
63  That well they showed desire for their dead bodies;

61  Tanto mi parver sùbiti e accorti
62  e l'uno e l'altro coro a dicer “Amme!”
63  che ben mostrar disio d'i corpi morti:

64  Nor sole for them perhaps, but for the mothers,
65  The fathers, and the rest who had been dear
66  Or ever they became eternal flames.

64  forse non pur per lor, ma per le mamme,
65  per li padri e per li altri che fuor cari
66  anzi che fosser sempiterne fiamme.

67  And lo! all round about of equal brightness
68  Arose a lustre over what was there,
69  Like an horizon that is clearing up.

67  Ed ecco intorno, di chiarezza pari,
68  nascere un lustro sopra quel che v'era,
69  per guisa d'orizzonte che rischiari.

70  And as at rise of early eve begin
71  Along the welkin new appearances,
72  So that the sight seems real and unreal,

70  E sì come al salir di prima sera
71  comincian per lo ciel nove parvenze,
72  sì che la vista pare e non par vera,

73  It seemed to me that new subsistences
74  Began there to be seen, and make a circle
75  Outside the other two circumferences.

73  parvemi lì novelle sussistenze
74  cominciare a vedere, e fare un giro
75  di fuor da l'altre due circunferenze.

76  O very sparkling of the Holy Spirit,
77  How sudden and incandescent it became
78  Unto mine eyes, that vanquished bore it not!

76  Oh vero sfavillar del Santo Spiro!
77  come si fece sùbito e candente
78  a li occhi miei che, vinti, nol soffriro!

79  But Beatrice so beautiful and smiling
80  Appeared to me, that with the other sights
81  That followed not my memory I must leave her.

79  Ma Bëatrice sì bella e ridente
80  mi si mostrò, che tra quelle vedute
81  si vuol lasciar che non seguir la mente.

82  Then to uplift themselves mine eyes resumed
83  The power, and I beheld myself translated
84  To higher salvation with my Lady only.

82  Quindi ripreser li occhi miei virtute
83  a rilevarsi; e vidimi translato
84  sol con mia donna in più alta salute.

85  Well was I ware that I was more uplifted
86  By the enkindled smiling of the star,
87  That seemed to me more ruddy than its wont.

85  Ben m'accors' io ch'io era più levato,
86  per l'affocato riso de la stella,
87  che mi parea più roggio che l'usato.

88  With all my heart, and in that dialect
89  Which is the same in all, such holocaust
90  To God I made as the new grace beseemed;

88  Con tutto 'l core e con quella favella
89  ch'è una in tutti, a Dio feci olocausto,
90  qual conveniesi a la grazia novella.

91  And not yet from my bosom was exhausted
92  The ardour of sacrifice, before I knew
93  This offering was accepted and auspicious;

91  E non er' anco del mio petto essausto
92  l'ardor del sacrificio, ch'io conobbi
93  esso litare stato accetto e fausto;

94  For with so great a lustre and so red
95  Splendours appeared to me in twofold rays,
96  I said: "O Helios who dost so adorn them!"

94  ché con tanto lucore e tanto robbi
95  m'apparvero splendor dentro a due raggi,
96  ch'io dissi: “O Elïòs che sì li addobbi!”

97  Even as distinct with less and greater lights
98  Glimmers between the two poles of the world
99  The Galaxy that maketh wise men doubt,

97  Come distinta da minori e maggi
98  lumi biancheggia tra ' poli del mondo
99  Galassia sì, che fa dubbiar ben saggi;

100  Thus constellated in the depths of Mars,
101  Those rays described the venerable sign
102  That quadrants joining in a circle make.

100  sì costellati facean nel profondo
101  Marte quei raggi il venerabil segno
102  che fan giunture di quadranti in tondo.

103  Here doth my memory overcome my genius;
104  For on that cross as levin gleamed forth Christ,
105  So that I cannot find ensample worthy;


103  Qui vince la memoria mia lo 'ngegno;
104  ché quella croce lampeggiava Cristo,
105  sì ch'io non so trovare essempro degno;

106  But he who takes his cross and follows Christ
107  Again will pardon me what I omit,
108  Seeing in that aurora lighten Christ.

106  ma chi prende sua croce e segue Cristo,
107  ancor mi scuserà di quel ch'io lasso,
108  vedendo in quell' albor balenar Cristo.

109  From horn to horn, and 'twixt the top and base,
110  Lights were in motion, brightly scintillating
111  As they together met and passed each other;

109  Di corno in corno e tra la cima e 'l basso
110  si movien lumi, scintillando forte
111  nel congiugnersi insieme e nel trapasso:

112  Thus level and aslant and swift and slow
113  We here behold, renewing still the sight,
114  The particles of bodies long and short,

112  così si veggion qui diritte e torte,
113  veloci e tarde, rinovando vista,
114  le minuzie d'i corpi, lunghe e corte,

115  Across the sunbeam move, wherewith is listed
116  Sometimes the shade, which for their own defence
117  People with cunning and with art contrive.

115  moversi per lo raggio onde si lista
116  talvolta l'ombra che, per sua difesa,
117  la gente con ingegno e arte acquista.

118  And as a lute and harp, accordant strung
119  With many strings, a dulcet tinkling make
120  To him by whom the notes are not distinguished,

118  E come giga e arpa, in tempra tesa
119  di molte corde, fa dolce tintinno
120  a tal da cui la nota non è intesa,

121  So from the lights that there to me appeared
122  Upgathered through the cross a melody,
123  Which rapt me, not distinguishing the hymn.

121  così da' lumi che lì m'apparinno
122  s'accogliea per la croce una melode
123  che mi rapiva, sanza intender l'inno.

124  Well was I ware it was of lofty laud,
125  Because there came to me, "Arise and conquer!"
126  As unto him who hears and comprehends not.

124  Ben m'accors' io ch'elli era d'alte lode,
125  però ch'a me venìa “Resurgi” e “Vinci”
126  come a colui che non intende e ode.

127  So much enamoured I became therewith,
128  That until then there was not anything
129  That e'er had fettered me with such sweet bonds.

127  Ïo m'innamorava tanto quinci,
128  che 'nfino a lì non fu alcuna cosa
129  che mi legasse con sì dolci vinci.
 
130  Perhaps my word appears somewhat too bold,
131  Postponing the delight of those fair eyes,
132  Into which gazing my desire has rest;

130  Forse la mia parola par troppo osa,
139  posponendo il piacer de li occhi belli,
140  ne' quai mirando mio disio ha posa;

133  But who bethinks him that the living seals
134  Of every beauty grow in power ascending,
135  And that I there had not turned round to those,

133  ma chi s'avvede che i vivi suggelli
134  d'ogne bellezza più fanno più suso,
135  e ch'io non m'era lì rivolto a quelli,

136  Can me excuse, if I myself accuse
137  To excuse myself, and see that I speak truly:
138  For here the holy joy is not disclosed,

136  escusar puommi di quel ch'io m'accuso
137  per escusarmi, e vedermi dir vero:
138  ché 'l piacer santo non è qui dischiuso,

139  Because ascending it becomes more pure.

139  perché si fa, montando, più sincero.

Canto XV
The heaven of Earth's temporal life is simple day-to-day peaceful domesticity, and which of us would not prefer this to the endless golden and neon spectacles of Heaven?  Mark Twain in his work "Extract from Captain Stormfield's Visit to Heaven" has a good deal of fun parodying the conventional views of heaven, and these chiefly fall into category of a such a stultifying boredom that it would have gratified Schopenhauer's most exalted pessimism, except for the fact that suicide could not provide the relief of an escape hatch.  We could not bear to spend a single afternoon in such a Heaven, let alone an eternity.  And if we look back on the cantos of the Paradiso and the last ones of the Purgatorio, they all seem to carry a sort of patina of perpetual holiday, quite entertaining, and quite enthralling to be sure, but would we want to spend all of our energies parading about with palm branches, or whirling about singing and dancing?  Dante, in the previous Canto, surely realized this, since he goes to some pains to say that the bodies that we now have, will be, and must be changed, because they are not equipped to endure such celebratory pleasures.  One wonders, if God, and God's redeemed, are so different, so fitted to these Heavenly aesthetic exaltations, why then did the Supreme Creator bother to make Earth and its flawed and suffering denizens at all?  Something is missing.  And what's missing is this: All the pleasures and placid pasttimes of simple conversation, simple domestic tasks, simple familial warmth and affection, the dawdling and tinkering and general geneality of doing what is practical and useful, but is so routine, that our minds are allowed the delight of simple reverie.  And what's missing also are all of the idle moments too, where reverie finds a home in doing nothing.  Heretofor, none of these things exist in Dante's Paradise, or for that matter, in most theologically imagined Paradises. This canto aims in some way to correct that almost totally embittered view that Dante had of his Earthly sojourn, his true Christain vision of a fallen Creation.  And it is characteristic of him that he places his correction out of reach, in this case, in his Earthly past, in some Viconian Golden Age, in the realm of the ancestors.  There is a resurrection here, but it is not the resurrection of the Entelechy's last trump, but one of naming, of giving renown by naming, of reifying his own metaphysical and physical inheiretance, and showing us that we, the living, should consider ouselves as the possible fulfillment of the hopes and dreams of our forbears and as the fruitful seeds of our descendents, and that our living, mortal breath, is the growing tip of all of the past's and the future's aspirations.  The image presented here is extraordinarily conservative.  Here the grandfathers and grandmothers are stripped of the vanity and ambition which has so infected and damned the present, and they are allowed the purity which only a loving nostalgia can provide.  And as an added bonus, Cacciaguida tells Dante that his status as a poet, his work on the present poem, has justified the ancestors' own lives on Earth.  Dante, the poet, through a kind of mind-meld with his ancestor, comes to understand that the virtues of his work, are the virtues of his ancestors, brought to fruition by their mutual merging with God.  There is an almost animalistic innocence and return to native naivite here, the husband dressed in skins, the distaff wives weaving the tapestries of mundane time.  It is a place of everyday pleasures, where couples are more than placated for their domestic labors by sharing their rest at night, and by knowing for certain that they will share their home in earth when they are buried ... but ... and this is the big caveat: We must remember that we are in the heaven of Mars, when Cacciaguida leaves this domestic peace to enter the political fray on behalf of the Emporer Conrad, a second Fall and expulsion from the Garden ensues.  And with this second fall, a second redemption must follow to expunge it: Namely: the martyrdom of Cacciaguida, which is the cause of his salvation and of his present joy.  Somehow, in a way, that I confess, I do not quite understand, that domestic bliss was not sufficient, another sacrifice seems to have been required, a sacrifice of death, of defeat, of the loneliness of widows, and of the orphaning of children, a descent into suffering and injustice, which our ordinary pleasures could neither prevent, nor once experienced, heal.  Because, even after living this domestic bliss, and praising it so extravagantly, Cacciaguida, in the last verses of this Canto calls this the "mondo fallace," the "deceitful world."  Here, as also in Eastern religions, this world, even at its most attractive, is an illusion, is Maya.  Clearly to set right this deceit, to see through this illusion even in, and perhaps most particularly in, its most comfortable aspects, something extraordinary must come into play — something like the martyrdom of Cacciaguida, the crucifixion of Jesus, the exile of Dante, or something like the writing of this extraordinary poem with its Paradise of spectacular happenings.

1  A will benign, in which reveals itself
2  Ever the love that righteously inspires,
3  As in the iniquitous, cupidity,

1  Benigna volontade in che si liqua
2  sempre l'amor che drittamente spira,
3 come cupidità fa ne la iniqua,

4  Silence imposed upon that dulcet lyre,
5  And quieted the consecrated chords,
6  That Heaven's right hand doth tighten and relax.

4  silenzio puose a quella dolce lira,
5 e fece quïetar le sante corde
6 che la destra del cielo allenta e tira.

7  How unto just entreaties shall be deaf
8  Those substances, which, to give me desire
9  Of praying them, with one accord grew silent?

7  Come saranno a' giusti preghi sorde
8  quelle sustanze che, per darmi voglia
9  ch'io le pregassi, a tacer fur concorde?

10  'Tis well that without end he should lament,
11  Who for the love of thing that doth not last
12  Eternally despoils him of that love!

10  Bene è che sanza termine si doglia
11  chi, per amor di cosa che non duri
12  etternalmente, quello amor si spoglia.

13  As through the pure and tranquil evening air
14  There shoots from time to time a sudden fire,
15  Moving the eyes that steadfast were before,

13  Quale per li seren tranquilli e puri
14  discorre ad ora ad or sùbito foco,
15  movendo li occhi che stavan sicuri,

16  And seems to be a star that changeth place,
17  Except that in the part where it is kindled
18  Nothing is missed, and this endureth little;

16  e pare stella che tramuti loco,
17  se non che da la parte ond' e' s'accende
18  nulla sen perde, ed esso dura poco:

19  So from the horn that to the right extends
20  Unto that cross's foot there ran a star
21  Out of the constellation shining there;

19  tale dal corno che 'n destro si stende
20  a piè di quella croce corse un astro
21  de la costellazion che lì resplende;

22  Nor was the gem dissevered from its ribbon,
23  But down the radiant fillet ran along,
24  So that fire seemed it behind alabaster.

22  né si partì la gemma dal suo nastro,
23  ma per la lista radïal trascorse,
24  che parve foco dietro ad alabastro.

25  Thus piteous did Anchises' shade reach forward,
26  If any faith our greatest Muse deserve,
27  When in Elysium he his son perceived.

25  Sì pïa l'ombra d'Anchise si porse,
26  se fede merta nostra maggior musa,
27  quando in Eliso del figlio s'accorse.

28  "O sanguis meus, O superinfusa
29  Gratia Dei, sicut tibi, cui
30  Bis unquam Coeli janua reclusa?"

28  “O sanguis meus, O superinfusa
29  gratïa Deï, sicut tibi cui
30  bis unquam celi ianüa reclusa?”

31  Thus that effulgence; whence I gave it heed;
32  Then round unto my Lady turned my sight,
33  And on this side and that was stupefied;

31  Così quel lume: ond' io m'attesi a lui;
32  poscia rivolsi a la mia donna il viso,
33  e quinci e quindi stupefatto fui;

34  For in her eyes was burning such a smile
35  That with mine own methought I touched the bottom
36  Both of my grace and of my Paradise!

34  ché dentro a li occhi suoi ardeva un riso
35  tal, ch'io pensai co' miei toccar lo fondo
36  de la mia gloria e del mio paradiso.

37  Then, pleasant to the hearing and the sight,
38  The spirit joined to its beginning things
39  I understood not, so profound it spake;

37  Indi, a udire e a veder giocondo,
38  giunse lo spirto al suo principio cose,
39  ch'io non lo 'ntesi, sì parlò profondo;

40  Nor did it hide itself from me by choice,
41  But by necessity; for its conception
42  Above the mark of mortals set itself.

40  né per elezïon mi si nascose,
41  ma per necessità, ché 'l suo concetto
42  al segno d'i mortal si soprapuose.

43  And when the bow of burning sympathy
44  Was so far slackened, that its speech descended
45  Towards the mark of our intelligence,

43  E quando l'arco de l'ardente affetto
44  fu sì sfogato, che 'l parlar discese
45  inver' lo segno del nostro intelletto,

46  The first thing that was understood by me
47  Was "Benedight be Thou, O Trine and One,
48  Who hast unto my seed so courteous been!"

46  la prima cosa che per me s'intese,
47  “Benedetto sia tu,” fu, “trino e uno,
48  che nel mio seme se' tanto cortese!”

49  And it continued: "Hunger long and grateful,
50  Drawn from the reading of the mighty volume
51  Wherein is never changed the white nor dark,

49  E seguì: “Grato e lontano digiuno,
50  tratto leggendo del magno volume
51  du' non si muta mai bianco né bruno,

52  Thou hast appeased, my son, within this light
53  In which I speak to thee, by grace of her
54  Who to this lofty flight with plumage clothed thee.

52  solvuto hai, figlio, dentro a questo lume
53  in ch'io ti parlo, mercé di colei
54  ch'a l'alto volo ti vestì le piume.

55  Thou thinkest that to me thy thought doth pass
56  From Him who is the first, as from the unit,
57  If that be known, ray out the five and six;

55  Tu credi che a me tuo pensier mei
56  da quel ch'è primo, così come raia
57  da l'un, se si conosce, il cinque e 'l sei;

58  And therefore who I am thou askest not,
59  And why I seem more joyous unto thee
60  Than any other of this gladsome crowd.

58  e però ch'io mi sia e perch' io paia
59  più gaudïoso a te, non mi domandi,
60  che alcun altro in questa turba gaia.

61  Thou think'st the truth; because the small and great
62  Of this existence look into the mirror
63  Wherein, before thou think'st, thy thought thou showest.

61  Tu credi 'l vero; ché i minori e ' grandi
62  di questa vita miran ne lo speglio
63  in che, prima che pensi, il pensier pandi;

64  But that the sacred love, in which I watch
65  With sight perpetual, and which makes me thirst
66  With sweet desire, may better be fulfilled,

64  ma perché 'l sacro amore in che io veglio
65  con perpetüa vista e che m'asseta
66  di dolce disïar, s'adempia meglio,

67  Now let thy voice secure and frank and glad
68  Proclaim the wishes, the desire proclaim,
69  To which my answer is decreed already."

67  la voce tua sicura, balda e lieta
68  suoni la volontà, suoni 'l disio,
69  a che la mia risposta è già decreta!”

70  To Beatrice I turned me, and she heard
71  Before I spake, and smiled to me a sign,
72  That made the wings of my desire increase;

70  Io mi volsi a Beatrice, e quella udio
71  pria ch'io parlassi, e arrisemi un cenno
72  che fece crescer l'ali al voler mio.

73  Then in this wise began I: "Love and knowledge,
74  When on you dawned the first Equality,
75  Of the same weight for each of you became;

73  Poi cominciai così: “L'affetto e 'l senno,
74  come la prima equalità v'apparse,
75  d'un peso per ciascun di voi si fenno,

76  For in the Sun, which lighted you and burned
77  With heat and radiance, they so equal are,
78  That all similitudes are insufficient.

76  però che 'l sol che v'allumò e arse,
77  col caldo e con la luce è sì iguali,
78  che tutte simiglianze sono scarse.

79  But among mortals will and argument,
80  For reason that to you is manifest,
81  Diversely feathered in their pinions are.

79  Ma voglia e argomento ne' mortali,
80  per la cagion ch'a voi è manifesta,
81  diversamente son pennuti in ali;

82  Whence I, who mortal am, feel in myself
83  This inequality; so give not thanks,
84  Save in my heart, for this paternal welcome.

82  ond' io, che son mortal, mi sento in questa
83  disagguaglianza, e però non ringrazio
84  se non col core a la paterna festa.

85  Truly do I entreat thee, living topaz!
86  Set in this precious jewel as a gem,
87  That thou wilt satisfy me with thy name."

85  Ben supplico io a te, vivo topazio
86  che questa gioia prezïosa ingemmi,
87  perché mi facci del tuo nome sazio.”

88  "O leaf of mine, in whom I pleasure took
89  E'en while awaiting, I was thine own root!"
90  Such a beginning he in answer made me.

88  “O fronda mia in che io compiacemmi
89  pur aspettando, io fui la tua radice”:
90  cotal principio, rispondendo, femmi.

91  Then said to me: "That one from whom is named
92  Thy race, and who a hundred years and more
93  Has circled round the mount on the first cornice,

91  Poscia mi disse: “Quel da cui si dice
92  tua cognazione e che cent' anni e piùe
93  girato ha 'l monte in la prima cornice,

94  A son of mine and thy great-grandsire was;
95  Well it behoves thee that the long fatigue
96  Thou shouldst for him make shorter with thy works.

94  mio figlio fu e tuo bisavol fue:
95  ben si convien che la lunga fatica
96  tu li raccorci con l'opere tue.

97  Florence, within the ancient boundary
98  From which she taketh still her tierce and nones,
99  Abode in quiet, temperate and chaste.

97  Fiorenza dentro da la cerchia antica,
98  ond' ella toglie ancora e terza e nona,
99  si stava in pace, sobria e pudica.

100  No golden chain she had, nor coronal,
101  Nor ladies shod with sandal shoon, nor girdle
102  That caught the eye more than the person did.

100  Non avea catenella, non corona,
101  non gonne contigiate, non cintura
102  che fosse a veder più che la persona.

103  Not yet the daughter at her birth struck fear
104  Into the father, for the time and dower
105  Did not o'errun this side or that the measure.

103  Non faceva, nascendo, ancor paura
104  la figlia al padre, ché 'l tempo e la dote
105  non fuggien quinci e quindi la misura.

106  No houses had she void of families,
107  Not yet had thither come Sardanapalus
108  To show what in a chamber can be done;

106  Non avea case di famiglia vòte;
107  non v'era giunto ancor Sardanapalo
108  a mostrar ciò che 'n camera si puote.

109  Not yet surpassed had Montemalo been
110  By your Uccellatojo, which surpassed
111  Shall in its downfall be as in its rise.

109  Non era vinto ancora Montemalo
110  dal vostro Uccellatoio, che, com'è vinto
111  nel montar sù, così sarà nel calo.

112  Bellincion Berti saw I go begirt
113  With leather and with bone, and from the mirror
114  His dame depart without a painted face;

112  Bellincion Berti vid' io andar cinto
113  di cuoio e d'osso, e venir da lo specchio
114  la donna sua sanza 'l viso dipinto;

115  And him of Nerli saw, and him of Vecchio,
116  Contented with their simple suits of buff
117  And with the spindle and the flax their dames.

115  e vidi quel d'i Nerli e quel del Vecchio
116  esser contenti a la pelle scoperta,
117  e le sue donne al fuso e al pennecchio.

118  O fortunate women! and each one was certain
119  Of her own burial-place, and none as yet
120  For sake of France was in her bed deserted.

118  Oh fortunate! ciascuna era certa
119  de la sua sepultura, e ancor nulla
120  era per Francia nel letto diserta.

121  One o'er the cradle kept her studious watch,
122  And in her lullaby the language used
123  That first delights the fathers and the mothers;

121  L'una vegghiava a studio de la culla,
122  e, consolando, usava l'idïoma
123  che prima i padri e le madri trastulla;

124  Another, drawing tresses from her distaff,
125  Told o'er among her family the tales
126  Of Trojans and of Fesole and Rome.

124  l'altra, traendo a la rocca la chioma,
125  favoleggiava con la sua famiglia
126  d'i Troiani, di Fiesole e di Roma.

127  As great a marvel then would have been held
128  A Lapo Salterello, a Cianghella,
129  As Cincinnatus or Cornelia now.

127  Saria tenuta allor tal maraviglia
128  una Cianghella, un Lapo Salterello,
129  qual or saria Cincinnato e Corniglia.

130  To such a quiet, such a beautiful
131  Life of the citizen, to such a safe
132  Community, and to so sweet an inn,

130  A così riposato, a così bello
131  viver di cittadini, a così fida
132  cittadinanza, a così dolce ostello,

133  Did Mary give me, with loud cries invoked,
134  And in your ancient Baptistery at once
135  Christian and Cacciaguida I became.

133  Maria mi diè, chiamata in alte grida;
134  e ne l'antico vostro Batisteo
135  insieme fui cristiano e Cacciaguida.

136  Moronto was my brother, and Eliseo;
137  From Val di Pado came to me my wife,
138  And from that place thy surname was derived.

136  Moronto fu mio frate ed Eliseo;
137  mia donna venne a me di val di Pado,
138  e quindi il sopranome tuo si feo.

139  I followed afterward the Emperor Conrad,
140  And he begirt me of his chivalry,
141  So much I pleased him with my noble deeds.

139  Poi seguitai lo 'mperador Currado;
140  ed el mi cinse de la sua milizia,
141  tanto per bene ovrar li venni in grado.

142  I followed in his train against that law's
143  Iniquity, whose people doth usurp
144  Your just possession, through your Pastor's fault.

142  Dietro li andai incontro a la nequizia
143  di quella legge il cui popolo usurpa,
144  per colpa d'i pastor, vostra giustizia.

145  There by that execrable race was I
146  Released from bonds of the fallacious world,
147  The love of which defileth many souls,

145  Quivi fu' io da quella gente turpa
146  disviluppato dal mondo fallace,
147  lo cui amor molt'anime deturpa;

148  And came from martyrdom unto this peace."

148  e venni dal martiro a questa pace.”

Canto XVI
(Some of my marginalia on an essay by E. van Alphen, entitled "Symptoms of Discursivity: Experience, Memory, and Trauma" in the book Acts of Memory: Cultural Recall in the Present, editors Mieke Bal, Jonathan Crewe, and Leo Spitzer.)

The past can only be found in the province of language, and not in the so-called "subjective experience" of historical individuals, reduced by their temporality to illusory ephemera.

Failed experience, or trauma, exceeds the boundaries of what can be perceived, represented, or remembered.  It is  the cesura, the gap, the vacuole — that gravity well in which everything about the past that was inexpressible in the discourse of that time becomes mythologized in the present as a "factual" memory.

"Reality is a rather discontinuous chaos (E. van Alphen)."  This is not a statement about reality.  It is the declaration of a trauma victim.  The nature of time may be quantum, and not a narrative at all.  Hence, our attempts to make a narrative, from what may well be packets of coiled simultaneities, presuppose failure and trauma.  All stories are therefore fiction, and all fictions are based upon a temporal/spatial dissociation from the ever-present-ever absent HERE.

What is the self?  Essentially it is not something, at least according to Dante's worldview, confined to a "skin-encapsulated ego,(Alan Watt's coinage)" but is something spread out in time, through a river of ancestors and descendants, both physical and metaphysical, and as we go further back in time, a curious alchemy takes place.  Historicity becomes legend, and in times of present trouble, and for an exile and a nomad like Dante, the present is all wrong, and quintessentially a time of trouble, the self is like a river (his metaphor, for the Commedia thrives on the essential metaphors of water and fire) which has been polluted as it flowed from its purer source.  By what means polluted?  By an admixture of elements not proper to its nature.  If you are 20 years old, in a progressive country like America, the past is anathema, a burden, and a constant source of restraint.  But when you are seventy, the past is such a checkerboard of trauma, that one constantly resorts to apply the Midas touch of Nostalgia to polish, clean, selectively remember and selectively forget, the past, so that the further back one goes, the more golden it becomes, just as when one follows a river from its turbid, turgid mouth, back to its original high-country spring, the purer it becomes.  For Dante that essential past purity, and golden glory is the Roman Empire, specifically the legend of Pax Romana, and the music of Cacciaguida's litany of names (and it is very musical in Tuscan Italian, even though the sound of the names which mean nothing to us are hollow sounds), has a golden quality — glorious — is Dante's word, as in the glorioles of halos.  We who have lived in the last century of art movements such as abstract expressionism or minimalism should not be shocked by the severe abstraction and minimalistic character of this canto.  In Hell and in Purgatory, specific, historical details are fleshed out, and they are always in the Nature of a fall, a trauma, something has gone wrong, and it is God's business, and the poet's, to trace that flow of blood back to the wound, and cauterize it.  Blood here, in this context, means bloodlines, the genetic river that flows through each separate life and unites it to life as a whole, and not just contemporary life, but life through all times.  

In another sense however, Cacciaguida’s, who in Paradise, takes immense joy in his discovery of what went wrong, is talking about an historical process, and doing his darnedest to identify the sources of corruption for what was originally, in the shine of nostalgia, glorious, pure, and peaceful.  His diagnosis of the pathogen?  Miscegenation, the intermingling of peoples.  Our modern sensibilities are shocked by this conservatism, and yet we can hardly fail to notice how Cacciaguida's history so resembles our own — the movement of rural peoples to the cities, and the transformation of cities from feudal networks of homogeneous people with the same customs, traditions, language (and Dante points out that the language of the past, for those of us in the present, is a foreign language) to a place of commerce, mercantilism, a place where naked economics rule, where the moral codebook is not a bible but a ledger of profit and loss, and in this commerce world, the old ideals of family, blood-lines, moral or feudal obligations and reciprocities are meaningless.  A couple of centuries later the Medici's moral code prevails: "Money to get power.  Power to get Money."  In this view, temporality itself, as well as history, becomes the trauma of which Wordsworth says: "Getting and spending we lay waste our powers."  Blake speaks of Satanic Mills.  And Eliot calls it "The unreal city."  In a sense, Plato was right, but for the wrong reasons, when he said that history has no place for a poet, and Dante, in Paradise, while reviewing history from an atemporal elevation beyond and above it, tells us in his circular way that starting from the desultory comment of the first verses of this canto, to the bitter verses which conclude it, that history must become legend for the soul, that the soul desires the musical litanies of glorious names, but not the grubby futilities and vain aspirations of the actual people who lived within the ever-shrinking, every-patched cloak of that skin of names and those hollow blazons of their heraldries.  For the poet, especially the Christian poet, history must be transformed into legend, and as in Vico's past, that legendary language was the language of gods and heroes, Giant Forms, to use Blake's term, whose speech glorified and made golden what were no doubt the same violent and petty deeds of the forbears so prevalent in the present, and so destined to be prevalent in the future.  Greek myth makes this clear.  The God's are people with unrestrained appetites, still chock-full, like children, of unrestrained libidinous powers.  And Dante makes it clear that he knows this, which is why through the whole of the Commedia, myth and the Bible are the two opposing visions whose binocularity deepens our view of reality.  Christianity is historical, not mythical, and yet its history is emblematic and archetypal.  And just as the protagonist Dante is wending his way from his chaotic life at the start of the poem, to rediscover his pure source in Beatrice, and to finally ascend through Paradise to a history-ending apotheosis, Dante's soul has a temporal shape, just as does his poem: a beginning, middle, and end, and that's why a canto like this has to be not only recounted, absent almost all of its trauma and tragedy, but recounted joyfully, because it reminds us of the shape of the soul as this journey.  

The question of ancestry, the meaning of the present (good or bad), and the destiny of our descendants in the future are always going to entail a sudden exhilaration of the individual ego as it escapes its single skin-encapsulation and realizes that the self extends through the whole domain of Time.  But along with this exhilaration, there is also this irrepressible trauma that comes as the self realizes that Time itself is the source of its trauma, and that the ego's only salvation is an escape from the wheel of traumas and retributions into an eternal world, to what I would say, is a poetic, aesthetic world, where even harsh judgements and litanies of the dead are resurrected by the music of the redeeming Word.

1  O thou our poor nobility of blood,
2  If thou dost make the people glory in thee
3  Down here where our affection languishes,

1  O poca nostra nobiltà di sangue,
2  se glorïar di te la gente fai
3  qua giù dove l'affetto nostro langue,

4  A marvellous thing it ne'er will be to me;
5  For there where appetite is not perverted,
6  I say in Heaven, of thee I made a boast!

4  mirabil cosa non mi sarà mai:
5  ché là dove appetito non si torce,
6  dico nel cielo, io me ne gloriai.

7  Truly thou art a cloak that quickly shortens,
8  So that unless we piece thee day by day
9  Time goeth round about thee with his shears!

7  Ben se' tu manto che tosto raccorce:
8  sì che, se non s'appon di dì in die,
9  lo tempo va dintorno con le force.

10  With 'You,' which Rome was first to tolerate,
11  (Wherein her family less perseveres,)
12  Yet once again my words beginning made;

10  Dal “voi” che prima a Roma s'offerie,
11  in che la sua famiglia men persevra,
12  ricominciaron le parole mie;

13  Whence Beatrice, who stood somewhat apart,
14  Smiling, appeared like unto her who coughed
15  At the first failing writ of Guenever.

13  onde Beatrice, ch'era un poco scevra,
14  ridendo, parve quella che tossio
15  al primo fallo scritto di Ginevra.

16  And I began: "You are my ancestor,
17  You give to me all hardihood to speak,
18  You lift me so that I am more than I.

16  Io cominciai: “Voi siete il padre mio;
17  voi mi date a parlar tutta baldezza;
18  voi mi levate sì, ch'i' son più ch'io.

19  So many rivulets with gladness fill
20  My mind, that of itself it makes a joy
21  Because it can endure this and not burst.

19  Per tanti rivi s'empie d'allegrezza
20  la mente mia, che di sé fa letizia
21  perché può sostener che non si spezza.

22  Then tell me, my beloved root ancestral,
23  Who were your ancestors, and what the years
24  That in your boyhood chronicled themselves?

22  Ditemi dunque, cara mia primizia,
23  quai fuor li vostri antichi e quai fuor li anni
24  che si segnaro in vostra püerizia;

25  Tell me about the sheepfold of Saint John,
26  How large it was, and who the people were
27  Within it worthy of the highest seats."

25  ditemi de l'ovil di San Giovanni
26  quanto era allora, e chi eran le genti
27  tra esso degne di più alti scanni.”

28  As at the blowing of the winds a coal
29  Quickens to flame, so I beheld that light
30  Become resplendent at my blandishments.

28  Come s'avviva a lo spirar d'i venti
29  carbone in fiamma, così vid' io quella
30  luce risplendere a' miei blandimenti;

31  And as unto mine eyes it grew more fair,
32  With voice more sweet and tender, but not in
33  This modern dialect, it said to me:

31  e come a li occhi miei si fé più bella,
32  così con voce più dolce e soave,
33  ma non con questa moderna favella,

34  "From uttering of the 'Ave,' till the birth
35  In which my mother, who is now a saint,
36  Of me was lightened who had been her burden,

34  dissemi: “Da quel dì che fu detto 'Ave'
35  al parto in che mia madre, ch'è or santa,
36  s'allevïò di me ond' era grave,

37  Unto its Lion had this fire returned
38  Five hundred fifty times and thirty more,
39  To reinflame itself beneath his paw.

37  al suo Leon cinquecento cinquanta
38  e trenta fiate venne questo foco
39  a rinfiammarsi sotto la sua pianta.

40  My ancestors and I our birthplace had
41  Where first is found the last ward of the city
42  By him who runneth in your annual game.

40  Li antichi miei e io nacqui nel loco
41  dove si truova pria l'ultimo sesto
42  da quei che corre il vostro annüal gioco.

43  Suffice it of my elders to hear this;
44  But who they were, and whence they thither came,
45  Silence is more considerate than speech.

43  Basti d'i miei maggiori udirne questo:
44  chi ei si fosser e onde venner quivi,
45  più è tacer che ragionare onesto.

46  All those who at that time were there between
47  Mars and the Baptist, fit for bearing arms,
48  Were a fifth part of those who now are living;

46  Tutti color ch'a quel tempo eran ivi
47  da poter arme tra Marte e 'l Batista,
48  erano il quinto di quei ch'or son vivi.

49  But the community, that now is mixed
50  With Campi and Certaldo and Figghine,
51  Pure in the lowest artisan was seen.

49  Ma la cittadinanza, ch'è or mista
50  di Campi, di Certaldo e di Fegghine,
51  pura vediesi ne l'ultimo artista.

52  O how much better 'twere to have as neighbours
53  The folk of whom I speak, and at Galluzzo
54  And at Trespiano have your boundary,

52  Oh quanto fora meglio esser vicine
53  quelle genti ch'io dico, e al Galluzzo
54  e a Trespiano aver vostro confine,

55  Than have them in the town, and bear the stench
56  Of Aguglione's churl, and him of Signa
57  Who has sharp eyes for trickery already.

55  che averle dentro e sostener lo puzzo
56  del villan d'Aguglion, di quel da Signa,
57  che già per barattare ha l'occhio aguzzo!

58  Had not the folk, which most of all the world
59  Degenerates, been a step-dame unto Caesar,
60  But as a mother to her son benignant,

58  Se la gente ch'al mondo più traligna
59  non fosse stata a Cesare noverca,
60  ma come madre a suo figlio benigna,

61  Some who turn Florentines, and trade and discount,
62  Would have gone back again to Simifonte
63  There where their grandsires went about as beggars.

61  tal fatto è fiorentino e cambia e merca,
62  che si sarebbe vòlto a Simifonti,
63  là dove andava l'avolo a la cerca;

64  At Montemurlo still would be the Counts,
65  The Cerchi in the parish of Acone,
66  Perhaps in Valdigrieve the Buondelmonti.

64  sariesi Montemurlo ancor de' Conti;
65  sarieno i Cerchi nel piovier d'Acone,
66  e forse in Valdigrieve i Buondelmonti.

67  Ever the intermingling of the people
68  Has been the source of malady in cities,
69  As in the body food it surfeits on;

67  Sempre la confusion de le persone
68  principio fu del mal de la cittade,
69  come del vostro il cibo che s'appone;

70  And a blind bull more headlong plunges down
71  Than a blind lamb; and very often cuts
72  Better and more a single sword than five.

70  e cieco toro più avaccio cade
71  che cieco agnello; e molte volte taglia
72  più e meglio una che le cinque spade.

73  If Luni thou regard, and Urbisaglia,
74  How they have passed away, and how are passing
75  Chiusi and Sinigaglia after them,

73  Se tu riguardi Luni e Orbisaglia
74  come sono ite, e come se ne vanno
75  di retro ad esse Chiusi e Sinigaglia,

76  To hear how races waste themselves away,
77  Will seem to thee no novel thing nor hard,
78  Seeing that even cities have an end.

76  udir come le schiatte si disfanno
77  non ti parrà nova cosa né forte,
78  poscia che le cittadi termine hanno.

79  All things of yours have their mortality,
80  Even as yourselves; but it is hidden in some
81  That a long while endure, and lives are short;

79  Le vostre cose tutte hanno lor morte,
80  sì come voi; ma celasi in alcuna
81  che dura molto, e le vite son corte.

82  And as the turning of the lunar heaven
83  Covers and bares the shores without a pause,
84  In the like manner fortune does with Florence.

82  E come 'l volger del ciel de la luna
83  cuopre e discuopre i liti sanza posa,
84  così fa di Fiorenza la Fortuna:

85  Therefore should not appear a marvellous thing
86  What I shall say of the great Florentines
87  Of whom the fame is hidden in the Past.

85  per che non dee parer mirabil cosa
86  ciò ch'io dirò de li alti Fiorentini
87  onde è la fama nel tempo nascosa.

88  I saw the Ughi, saw the Catellini,
89  Filippi, Greci, Ormanni, and Alberichi,
90  Even in their fall illustrious citizens;

88  Io vidi li Ughi e vidi i Catellini,
89  Filippi, Greci, Ormanni e Alberichi,
90  già nel calare, illustri cittadini;

91  And saw, as mighty as they ancient were,
92  With him of La Sannella him of Arca,
93  And Soldanier, Ardinghi, and Bostichi.

91  e vidi così grandi come antichi,
92  con quel de la Sannella, quel de l'Arca,
93  e Soldanieri e Ardinghi e Bostichi.

94  Near to the gate that is at present laden
95  With a new felony of so much weight
96  That soon it shall be jetsam from the bark,

94  Sovra la porta ch'al presente è carca
95  di nova fellonia di tanto peso
96  che tosto fia iattura de la barca,

97  The Ravignani were, from whom descended
98  The County Guido, and whoe'er the name
99  Of the great Bellincione since hath taken.

97  erano i Ravignani, ond' è disceso
98  il conte Guido e qualunque del nome
99  de l'alto Bellincione ha poscia preso.

100  He of La Pressa knew the art of ruling
101  Already, and already Galigajo
102  Had hilt and pommel gilded in his house.

100  Quel de la Pressa sapeva già come
101  regger si vuole, e avea Galigaio
102  dorata in casa sua già l'elsa e 'l pome.

103  Mighty already was the Column Vair,
104  Sacchetti, Giuochi, Fifant, and Barucci,
105  And Galli, and they who for the bushel blush.

103  Grand' era già la colonna del Vaio,
104  Sacchetti, Giuochi, Fifanti e Barucci
105  e Galli e quei ch'arrossan per lo staio.

106  The stock from which were the Calfucci born
107  Was great already, and already chosen
108  To curule chairs the Sizii and Arrigucci.

106  Lo ceppo di che nacquero i Calfucci
107  era già grande, e già eran tratti
108  a le curule Sizii e Arrigucci.

109  O how beheld I those who are undone
110  By their own pride! and how the Balls of Gold
111  Florence enflowered in all their mighty deeds!

109  Oh quali io vidi quei che son disfatti
110  per lor superbia! e le palle de l'oro
111  fiorian Fiorenza in tutt' i suoi gran fatti.

112  So likewise did the ancestors of those
113  Who evermore, when vacant is your church,
114  Fatten by staying in consistory.

112  Così facieno i padri di coloro
113  che, sempre che la vostra chiesa vaca,
114  si fanno grassi stando a consistoro.

115  The insolent race, that like a dragon follows
116  Whoever flees, and unto him that shows
117  His teeth or purse is gentle as a lamb,

115  L'oltracotata schiatta che s'indraca
116  dietro a chi fugge, e a chi mostra 'l dente
117  o ver la borsa, com' agnel si placa,

118  Already rising was, but from low people;
119  So that it pleased not Ubertin Donato
120  That his wife's father should make him their kin.

118  già venìa sù, ma di picciola gente;
119  sì che non piacque ad Ubertin Donato
120  che poï il suocero il fé lor parente.

121  Already had Caponsacco to the Market
122  From Fesole descended, and already
123  Giuda and Infangato were good burghers.

121  Già era 'l Caponsacco nel mercato
122  disceso giù da Fiesole, e già era
123  buon cittadino Giuda e Infangato.

124  I'll tell a thing incredible, but true;
125  One entered the small circuit by a gate
126  Which from the Della Pera took its name!



124  Io dirò cosa incredibile e vera:
125  nel picciol cerchio s'entrava per porta
126  che si nomava da quei de la Pera.

127  Each one that bears the beautiful escutcheon
128  Of the great baron whose renown and name
129  The festival of Thomas keepeth fresh,

127  Ciascun che de la bella insegna porta
128  del gran barone il cui nome e 'l cui pregio
129  la festa di Tommaso riconforta,

130  Knighthood and privilege from him received;
131  Though with the populace unites himself
132  To-day the man who binds it with a border.

130  da esso ebbe milizia e privilegio;
131  avvegna che con popol si rauni
132  oggi colui che la fascia col fregio.

133  Already were Gualterotti and Importuni;
134  And still more quiet would the Borgo be
135  If with new neighbours it remained unfed.

133  Già eran Gualterotti e Importuni;
134  e ancor saria Borgo più quïeto,
135  se di novi vicin fosser digiuni.

136  The house from which is born your lamentation,
137  Through just disdain that death among you brought
138  And put an end unto your joyous life,

136  La casa di che nacque il vostro fleto,
137  per lo giusto disdegno che v'ha morti
138  e puose fine al vostro viver lieto,

139  Was honoured in itself and its companions.
140  O Buondelmonte, how in evil hour
141  Thou fled'st the bridal at another's promptings!

139  era onorata, essa e suoi consorti:
140  o Buondelmonte, quanto mal fuggisti
141  le nozze süe per li altrui conforti!

142  Many would be rejoicing who are sad,
143  If God had thee surrendered to the Ema
144  The first time that thou camest to the city.

142  Molti sarebber lieti, che son tristi,
143  se Dio t'avesse conceduto ad Ema
144  la prima volta ch'a città venisti.

145  But it behoved the mutilated stone
146  Which guards the bridge, that Florence should provide
147  A victim in her latest hour of peace.

145  Ma conveniesi, a quella pietra scema
146  che guarda 'l ponte, che Fiorenza fesse
147  vittima ne la sua pace postrema.

148  With all these families, and others with them,
149  Florence beheld I in so great repose,
150  That no occasion had she whence to weep;

148  Con queste genti, e con altre con esse,
149  vid' io Fiorenza in sì fatto riposo,
150  che non avea cagione onde piangesse.

151  With all these families beheld so just
152  And glorious her people, that the lily
153  Never upon the spear was placed reversed,

151  Con queste genti vid' io glorïoso
152  e giusto il popol suo, tanto che 'l giglio
153  non era ad asta mai posto a ritroso,

154  Nor by division was vermilion made."

154  né per divisïon fatto vermiglio.”

Canto XVII
All through the poem, our certain knowledge of the past is projected, that is, prophesied, as potential knowledge of the future, but this maneuver is no more prevalent than here, as Dante's ancestor from 300 years previous makes predictions about Dante's future from Easter week, in the year 1300 A.D. — that is, from the time of the poem to presumably the time of the poet's death.  It seems that Time, historical Time, is subtly or not so subtly, saturated with knowledge of itself, its patterns in the past, which anyone can see, as one might see the completed patterns in a woven tapestry, seeming to be readable, that is, predictive of the future.  If they are, they would be so by virtue of this characteristic of pattern-making, which encompasses the future as well as the past.  (See the metaphor on weaving, verses 101 - 102.)  Certainly an artist of Dante's caliber must have become aware of this as he worked out the schema of his poem, for things merely intuited in the first canti of the Inferno are brought to what seems an often surprising fruition in the subsequent canticles of the poem.  These "surprises" are seen in retrospect to result in inevitabilities, because the template has, as it were, a fractal-like nature, any minute segment of Time being but a hologram for the All-Timeliness of Eternity.  Is this predestination?  Dante says no, but it is something like a deepening awareness of any moment or movement in Time, which when examined with increasing penetration reveals these repeating patterns.  Pound, in his own Cantos compares these like historical events separated by space, time, and cultures to rhyme in poetry.  These events are all of a pattern, just as similar sounds in a poem might form a predictable scheme.  If a rhyme scheme is ABAB for example, we cannot predict which specific word is going to be used for the rhyme, but we can tell what the sound of that word will be.  Perhaps prophecies work something like this, repeating past events with similarities, but not necessarily with exactitudes.  Time can be kaleidoscopic as well as sequential, and we can see how the same moments, depending upon our awareness or point-of-view, can configure and reconfigure themselves into apparently different patterns without changing their essential elemental nature.  (For an interesting take on time-fractals as quantum-like packets of similarities connecting in a non-linear way, see Albert-László Barabási's book, Bursts: The Hidden Pattern Behind Everything We Do.)  These concepts are difficult if not impossible to grasp in any linearly logical way, but through poetic metaphor and the layered nature of experience, we are made aware of them if only in a tangential way.  There seems to be a movement from vagueness to articulation as awareness penetrates such mysteries, and in this canto, that movement is mirrored in a pattern in which thought is made more articulate in speech, speech in writing, and writing in turn prompting more articulated thought in the form of establishing something we call meaning.  (Note verses 7 - 12, where Beatrice, who can read Dante's mind, asks him to speak his thoughts aloud so that he may more fully hear them.)  If there is any work of art in which pattern — as a networked system of references which are mythological, scriptural, philosophical, geological, astrological, political, theological, historical, natural, and especially structural in the terza rima and canti/canticle numeric/linguistic template of the poem — which is any better model of this kind of fractal patterning, it is more likely to be found in music (or architecture) than in another poem, which is why we find in the Commedia this thorough-composed attribute, both musical and architectural, and why its author could predict with such apparent arrogant certainty the poem's future fame.  Among all the Commedia's many virtues, this quality of being a mirror image of Time has perhaps few equals in the Western Canon.  And in this sense, we might place it with works like the I Ching, as something more than the usual literary production. (Another example of this temporal network patterning is explored as  Time-Wave Models in Terence McKenna's The Invisible Landscape: Mind, Hallucinogens and the I Ching.)  

For me, this is the saddest of all the cantos, not the most horrifying, but the saddest.  Because, in this canto, in the plainest of language, Dante the protagonist and Dante the poet become one: Dante the exile and nomad.  Why here?  In the Heaven of Mars, in the Paradise of militant spirits?  In the midst of the most exquisite of unearthly joys, why this heavy, hopeless pronouncement of Dante's temporal life?  In these verses, you can hear a great metaphysical crash.  The terrestrial world's girders snap and collapse as the great tree of life, an Yggdrasil of historical fate, comes down, exploding in a cloud of duff and dust.  Why this is heavenly and not tragic is the magic of the canto.

This is a canto of reversals, reversals that linguistically are embodied in paradoxes, the back looping of Time's seemingly inexorable forward push, a figure from the past, Cacciaguida’s, foretelling the Dante's future.  The swift arrow of time, here is slowed, mentioned first in verse 27, but not finding its target until verse 57.  Rich men changing states with beggars.  Enemies praising the virtues of their foe.  The poet, master of a communal art, becomes a party of one.  The exile descends stairs before ascending them.  The innocent is punished by the guilty.  The prophet of the future is speaking from the distant past.  A man of peace is martyred in war to establish peace.  These paradoxical "truths" are woven into the pattern of Time, and are geometrically certain, as sure as the conclusion of a book is foretold in its beginning, as certain as a ship must flow with the current that sustains it, and cast its reflection, and he who tells all this is himself compared to a reflection, that of a reversing mirror, reflecting the brightness of the sun.  Here, Dante, who has bathed in the waters of Lethe, shows that he has not been cleansed of memory, for he remembers his journey through the lower worlds, his poetry's guide, Virgil, the dark prophecies that he has heard of his temporal fate by those in Hell and in Purgatory.  I have had the hardest time coming to grips with the deep lessons of this canto, the hardest time accepting that these paradoxes and tragedies of temporal life could possibly lead to the aesthetic exultation embodied in Cacciaguida, and in the poem, the hardest time finding peace in the message of this militant spirit.  I don't know that I have accepted these lessons, or ever will, and that might be the most transforming lesson of them all, because it is plain, brutal, exalting.  And here I am, strung up and strung out on these verses, needing to move on, crippled and incomplete, wanting above all to have been more certain by this point in Paradise, but now having to swallow this bitter pill, which Dante promises will become sweet, just as that misanthrope on Patmos promised, but which here and now still seems bitter, indigestible, and yet utterly resistant to any attempt to vomit it forth, to read it as irony, and not be choking on these plain bones of contention, which seem to be my own wracked skeleton.  Here the discomfort of the doubt that the first verses of the canto refer to is magnified by the faith that is exposed at the canto's conclusion.  Here, amidst all the amazement that I experience from the intense mastery displayed in the Commedia, is the regret that this mastery is so irrefutable in delivering this canto's message.  Here one must accept a fatal diagnosis as an invitation to impregnable health.  Here we are forced to ask: What have my limitations, catastrophes, and woundings allowed me to be or do that would have been otherwise impossible?  Or to put it another way, how am I enabled to fulfill my destiny as a consequence of this war against myself?  It makes no sense, it transcends sense: It's Dante.  But the Real, to use a Lacanian term is absolute, whole, and without fissure.  The Real is the shining void of liberation that the Tibetan Buddhist promulgate.  Thus the Real is the most stunning reversal and paradox of them all.  It is set forth in these lines:

73  Who such benign regard shall have for thee
74  That 'twixt you twain, in doing and in asking,
75  That shall be first which is with others last.

73  ch'in te avrà sì benigno riguardo,
74  che del fare e del chieder, tra voi due,
75  fia primo quel che tra li altri è più tardo.

Here Dante is in the position of infant to child, or even that of fetus to womb, but most crucially that of Creature to Creator.  This is the grace wherein one's needs and one's desires are fulfilled before they are sought, the behest supplied before requested, and this is the relationship that the poet has with his Muse, and the aspirant has with the Divine.  After such a realization, militancy has no meaning, for every dissonant event in that pattern of temporal life is harmonized to bliss in the music of eternity.  The reflection — the speculation, the contemplation, the poem — shines as the sun in a mirror, and the bliss of the Creator is experienced by the aspirant as his own body, insubstantial and illusory in every way but one, it is the very image of its God.
 

The key to this canto is at the end, where Dante asks Cacciaguida about how or if his work will survive to a time when he and his contemporaries are thought of as the ancients.  It is here that the protagonist and the poet are most fully one, because as one they realize that their exile and nomad life is not a punishment, but a metaposition, a necessary place of perspective to be what is needed to confer fame and to achieve it.  When Dante asks his ancestor, his ancient, if he should uphold the truth, this is the truth that he vows to express.  How could Dante the poet have spoken the truth of his times and of all times for the artist if he were not an embodiment of that truth?  Inside the walls of a city, a country, a culture, is no place to rise above and see the patterns that extend from the past to the future, and which are everywhere weaving the present.  Dante's fate is a blessing, and not only for him, but for the art of poetry, and for those who have been blessed by his work in the centuries that have since seen in it a source of illumination.  
   
1  As came to Clymene, to be made certain
2  Of that which he had heard against himself,
3  He who makes fathers chary still to children,

1  Qual venne a Climenè, per accertarsi
2  di ciò ch'avëa incontro a sé udito,
3  quei ch'ancor fa li padri ai figli scarsi;

4  Even such was I, and such was I perceived
5  By Beatrice and by the holy light
6  That first on my account had changed its place.

4  tal era io, e tal era sentito
5  e da Beatrice e da la santa lampa
6  che pria per me avea mutato sito.

7  Therefore my Lady said to me: "Send forth
8  The flame of thy desire, so that it issue
9  Imprinted well with the internal stamp;

7  Per che mia donna “Manda fuor la vampa
8  del tuo disio,” mi disse, “sì ch'ella esca
9  segnata bene de la interna stampa:

10  Not that our knowledge may be greater made
11  By speech of thine, but to accustom thee
12  To tell thy thirst, that we may give thee drink."

10  non perché nostra conoscenza cresca
11  per tuo parlare, ma perché t'ausi
12  a dir la sete, sì che l'uom ti mesca.”

13  "O my beloved tree, (that so dost lift thee,
14  That even as minds terrestrial perceive
15  No triangle containeth two obtuse,

13  “O cara piota mia che sì t'insusi,
14  che, come veggion le terrene menti
15  non capere in trïangol due ottusi,

16  So thou beholdest the contingent things
17  Ere in themselves they are, fixing thine eyes
18  Upon the point in which all times are present,)

16  così vedi le cose contingenti
17  anzi che sieno in sé, mirando il punto
18  a cui tutti li tempi son presenti;

19  While I was with Virgilius conjoined
20  Upon the mountain that the souls doth heal,
21  And when descending into the dead world,

19  mentre ch'io era a Virgilio congiunto
20  su per lo monte che l'anime cura
21  e discendendo nel mondo defunto,

22  Were spoken to me of my future life
23  Some grievous words; although I feel myself
24  In sooth foursquare against the blows of chance.

22  dette mi fuor di mia vita futura
23  parole gravi, avvegna ch'io mi senta
24  ben tetragono ai colpi di ventura;

25  On this account my wish would be content
26  To hear what fortune is approaching me,
27  Because foreseen an arrow comes more slowly."

25  per che la voglia mia saria contenta
26  d'intender qual fortuna mi s'appressa:
27  ché saetta previsa vien più lenta.”

28  Thus did I say unto that selfsame light
29  That unto me had spoken before; and even
30  As Beatrice willed was my own will confessed.

28  Così diss' io a quella luce stessa
29  che pria m'avea parlato; e come volle
30  Beatrice, fu la mia voglia confessa.

31  Not in vague phrase, in which the foolish folk
32  Ensnared themselves of old, ere yet was slain
33  The Lamb of God who taketh sins away,

31  Né per ambage, in che la gente folle
32  già s'inviscava pria che fosse anciso
33 l'Agnel di Dio che le peccata tolle,

34  But with clear words and unambiguous
35  Language responded that paternal love,
36  Hid and revealed by its own proper smile:

34  ma per chiare parole e con preciso
35  latin rispuose quello amor paterno,
36  chiuso e parvente del suo proprio riso:

37  "Contingency, that outside of the volume
38  Of your materiality extends not,
39  Is all depicted in the eternal aspect.

37  “La contingenza, che fuor del quaderno
38  de la vostra matera non si stende,
39  tutta è dipinta nel cospetto etterno;

40  Necessity however thence it takes not,
41  Except as from the eye, in which 'tis mirrored,
42  A ship that with the current down descends.

40  necessità però quindi non prende
41  se non come dal viso in che si specchia
42  nave che per torrente giù discende.

43  From thence, e'en as there cometh to the ear
44  Sweet harmony from an organ, comes in sight
45  To me the time that is preparing for thee.

43  Da indi, sì come viene ad orecchia
44  dolce armonia da organo, mi viene
45  a vista il tempo che ti s'apparecchia.

46  As forth from Athens went Hippolytus,
47  By reason of his step-dame false and cruel,
48  So thou from Florence must perforce depart.

46  Qual si partio Ipolito d'Atene
47  per la spietata e perfida noverca,
48  tal di Fiorenza partir ti convene.

49  Already this is willed, and this is sought for;
50  And soon it shall be done by him who thinks it,
51  Where every day the Christ is bought and sold.

49  Questo si vuole e questo già si cerca,
50  e tosto verrà fatto a chi ciò pensa
51  là dove Cristo tutto dì si merca.

52  The blame shall follow the offended party
53  In outcry as is usual; but the vengeance
54  Shall witness to the truth that doth dispense it.

52  La colpa seguirà la parte offensa
53  in grido, come suol; ma la vendetta
54  fia testimonio al ver che la dispensa.

55  Thou shalt abandon everything beloved
56  Most tenderly, and this the arrow is
57  Which first the bow of banishment shoots forth.

55  Tu lascerai ogne cosa diletta
56  più caramente; e questo è quello strale
57  che l'arco de lo essilio pria saetta.
58  Thou shalt have proof how savoureth of salt
59  The bread of others, and how hard a road
60  The going down and up another's stairs.

58  Tu proverai sì come sa di sale
59  lo pane altrui, e come è duro calle
60  lo scendere e 'l salir per l'altrui scale.

61  And that which most shall weigh upon thy shoulders
62  Will be the bad and foolish company
63  With which into this valley thou shalt fall;

61  E quel che più ti graverà le spalle,
62  sarà la compagnia malvagia e scempia
63  con la qual tu cadrai in questa valle;

64  For all ingrate, all mad and impious
65  Will they become against thee; but soon after
66  They, and not thou, shall have the forehead scarlet.

64  che tutta ingrata, tutta matta ed empia
65  si farà contr' a te; ma, poco appresso,
66  ella, non tu, n'avrà rossa la tempia.

67  Of their bestiality their own proceedings
68  Shall furnish proof; so 'twill be well for thee
69  A party to have made thee by thyself.

67  Di sua bestialitate il suo processo
68  farà la prova; sì ch'a te fia bello
69  averti fatta parte per te stesso.

70  Thine earliest refuge and thine earliest inn
71  Shall be the mighty Lombard's courtesy,
72  Who on the Ladder bears the holy bird,

70  Lo primo tuo refugio e 'l primo ostello
71  sarà la cortesia del gran Lombardo
71  che 'n su la scala porta il santo uccello;

73  Who such benign regard shall have for thee
74  That 'twixt you twain, in doing and in asking,
75  That shall be first which is with others last.

73  ch'in te avrà sì benigno riguardo,
74  che del fare e del chieder, tra voi due,
75  fia primo quel che tra li altri è più tardo.

76  With him shalt thou see one who at his birth
77  Has by this star of strength been so impressed,
78  That notable shall his achievements be.

76  Con lui vedrai colui che 'mpresso fue,
77  nascendo, sì da questa stella forte,
78  che notabili fier l'opere sue.

79  Not yet the people are aware of him
80  Through his young age, since only nine years yet
81  Around about him have these wheels revolved.

79  Non se ne son le genti ancora accorte
80  per la novella età, ché pur nove anni
81  son queste rote intorno di lui torte;

82  But ere the Gascon cheat the noble Henry,
83  Some sparkles of his virtue shall appear
84  In caring not for silver nor for toil.

82  ma pria che 'l Guasco l'alto Arrigo inganni,
83  parran faville de la sua virtute
84  in non curar d'argento né d'affanni.

85  So recognized shall his magnificence
86  Become hereafter, that his enemies
87  Will not have power to keep mute tongues about it.

85  Le sue magnificenze conosciute
86  saranno ancora, sì che ' suoi nemici
87  non ne potran tener le lingue mute.

88  On him rely, and on his benefits;
89  By him shall many people be transformed,
90  Changing condition rich and mendicant;

88  A lui t'aspetta e a' suoi benefici;
89  per lui fia trasmutata molta gente,
90  cambiando condizion ricchi e mendici;

91  And written in thy mind thou hence shalt bear
92  Of him, but shalt not say it"—and things said he
93  Incredible to those who shall be present.

91  e portera'ne scritto ne la mente
92 di lui, e nol dirai”; e disse cose
93  incredibili a quei che fier presente.

94  Then added: "Son, these are the commentaries
95  On what was said to thee; behold the snares
96  That are concealed behind few revolutions;

94  Poi giunse: “Figlio, queste son le chiose
95  di quel che ti fu detto; ecco le 'nsidie
96  che dietro a pochi giri son nascose.

97  Yet would I not thy neighbours thou shouldst envy,
98  Because thy life into the future reaches
99  Beyond the punishment of their perfidies."

97  Non vo' però ch'a' tuoi vicini invidie,
98  poscia che s'infutura la tua vita
99  via più là che 'l punir di lor perfidie.”

100  When by its silence showed that sainted soul
101  That it had finished putting in the woof
102  Into that web which I had given it warped,

100  Poi che, tacendo, si mostrò spedita
101  l'anima santa di metter la trama
102  in quella tela ch'io le porsi ordita,

103  Began I, even as he who yearneth after,
104  Being in doubt, some counsel from a person
105  Who seeth, and uprightly wills, and loves:

103  io cominciai, come colui che brama,
104  dubitando, consiglio da persona
105  che vede e vuol dirittamente e ama:

106  "Well see I, father mine, how spurreth on
107  The time towards me such a blow to deal me
108  As heaviest is to him who most gives way.

106  “Ben veggio, padre mio, sì come sprona
107  lo tempo verso me, per colpo darmi
108  tal, ch'è più grave a chi più s'abbandona;

109  Therefore with foresight it is well I arm me,
110  That, if the dearest place be taken from me,
111  I may not lose the others by my songs.

109  per che di provedenza è buon ch'io m'armi,
110  sì che, se loco m'è tolto più caro,
111  io non perdessi li altri per miei carmi.

112  Down through the world of infinite bitterness,
113  And o'er the mountain, from whose beauteous summit
114  The eyes of my own Lady lifted me,

112  Giù per lo mondo sanza fine amaro,
113  e per lo monte del cui bel cacume
114  li occhi de la mia donna mi levaro,

115  And afterward through heaven from light to light,
116  I have learned that which, if I tell again,
107  Will be a savour of strong herbs to many.

115  e poscia per lo ciel, di lume in lume,
116  ho io appreso quel che s'io ridico,
117  a molti fia sapor di forte agrume;

108  And if I am a timid friend to truth,
109  I fear lest I may lose my life with those
110  Who will hereafter call this time the olden."

118  e s'io al vero son timido amico,
119  temo di perder viver tra coloro
120  che questo tempo chiameranno antico.”

121  The light in which was smiling my own treasure
122  Which there I had discovered, flashed at first
123  As in the sunshine doth a golden mirror;

121  La luce in che rideva il mio tesoro
122  ch'io trovai lì, si fé prima corusca,
123  quale a raggio di sole specchio d'oro;

124  Then made reply: "A conscience overcast
125  Or with its own or with another's shame,
126  Will taste forsooth the tartness of thy word;

124  indi rispuose: “Coscïenza fusca
125  o de la propria o de l'altrui vergogna
126  pur sentirà la tua parola brusca.

127  But ne'ertheless, all falsehood laid aside,
128  Make manifest thy vision utterly,
129  And let them scratch wherever is the itch;

127  Ma nondimen, rimossa ogne menzogna,
128  tutta tua visïon fa manifesta;
129  e lascia pur grattar dov' è la rogna.

130  For if thine utterance shall offensive be
131  At the first taste, a vital nutriment
132  'Twill leave thereafter, when it is digested.

130  Ché se la voce tua sarà molesta
131  nel primo gusto, vital nodrimento
132  lascerà poi, quando sarà digesta.

133  This cry of thine shall do as doth the wind,
134  Which smiteth most the most exalted summits,
135  And that is no slight argument of honour.

133  Questo tuo grido farà come vento,
134  che le più alte cime più percuote;
135  e ciò non fa d'onor poco argomento.

136  Therefore are shown to thee within these wheels,
137  Upon the mount and in the dolorous valley,
138  Only the souls that unto fame are known;

136  Però ti son mostrate in queste rote,
137  nel monte e ne la valle dolorosa
138  pur l'anime che son di fama note,

139  Because the spirit of the hearer rests not,
140  Nor doth confirm its faith by an example
142  Which has the root of it unknown and hidden,
139  che l'animo di quel ch'ode, non posa
140  né ferma fede per essempro ch'aia
142  la sua radice incognita e ascosa,

143  Or other reason that is not apparent."

143  né per altro argomento che non paia.”

Canto XVIII

The heaven of Jupiter may be compared to Geometry because of two properties: one is that it moves between two heavens that are antithetical to its fine temperance, namely that of Mars and that of Saturn; consequently Ptolemy says, in the book referred to, that Jupiter is a star of temperate constitution between the cold of Saturn and the heat of Mars; the other is that among all the stars it appears white, almost silvery.  And these things are found in the science of Geometry.  Geometry moves between two things antithetical to it, namely the point and the circle – and I mean “circle” in the broad sense of anything round, whether a solid body or a surface; for, as Euclid says, the point is its beginning, and, as he says, the circle is its most perfect figure, which must therefore be conceived as its end.  Therefore Geometry moves between the point and the circle as between its beginning and end, and these two are antithetical to its certainty; for the point cannot be measured because of its indivisibility, and it is impossible to square the circle perfectly because of its arc, and so it cannot be measured exactly.  Geometry is furthermore most white insofar as it is without taint of error and most certain both in itself and in its handmaid, which is called Optics.

Convivio, Book II, Chapter 13

When you begin reading Dante closely, by this point in the Commedia, you reach a condition which might be called "excellence fatigue."  The reader has been infused and enthused by almost too many insights, no small number of which pertain to Dante's unequaled technical skill in organizing his material in such a way that it is productive of this capacity to not just express meaning, but like life itself, to embody it.  Thus stunned, you begin to ask yourself more fundamental questions about how Dante's use of language enables him to create so much wonder and beauty, which fruit as so much genuine knowledge about how language works in modeling the world, an attribute that as the previous canto suggested, that is productive of fame.  Fame in this case cannot be compared to what we ordinarily think of as celebrity, that is, renown among a large number of people for a long period of time.  Rather, it is something like the ability to generate insight across different historical eras, different subjects, different types of readers, and different idioms.  Dante's idiom is that of an educated Western Christian in the year 1300, but note how he is able to present something so sophisticated as our contemporary subjects of chaos theory or fuzzy thinking, and how randomness organizes itself, partly through processes of human observation and perception, into meaningful form.  Rereading and rereading the first 30 lines of this canto, infuses us with a feeling in which an exuberant loving joy bursts out of the sacred marriage of language and the effects of language, his poetry, no matter what its content — sad, horrifying, judging, despairing, glittering with spectacle — is always a triumph that comes from mere, naked existence itself, conjuring first the void, and then the primal chaos which initially negates the void.  In this canto, sparks flying up from a burning log (random, inorganic), or birds rising and flocking (seemingly random, organic, and the result of living appetites and processes), the formation of letters, their shapes derived from the geometrical constants of lines and curves ... all of this is embedded in an intricate network of historical, astrological, geological, scriptural, natural, mythological, theological (etc. as noted in these comments on the previous canto) all meticulously arranged in a strict order of sound geometries, which even allow for cryptological messaging.  Examples of this network occur not just in those I've cited here, but throughout this canto.  In fact, a good exercise for a skilled mathematical/linguist would be to graph how this whole network of metaphors and idioms operate throughout the Commedia.  The spectacle here of the intelligent lights arranging themselves into the shape of a cross, the letters of the alphabet, a lily, reminds us of those marching bands at half-time shows, or those shots from above where costumed dances form various geometric shapes, but here these are the enactments of an extremely agile and gifted imagination, with the linguistic skill to not only present such spectacles but to infuse them with those flexible and multivalent embodiments of meaning which lead to that excellence noted above.  From these techniques we are able to derive insights, certainly in this case on the theme of justice, but also on how language, and especially poetic language, is in itself a vehicle for establishing justice.  That is, as readers, we expand our notions about justice into the realms of aesthetics and linguistics, the idea of justice no longer merely a concept confined to sociological and legal domains.  In this canto, we are made aware that something has happened to the protagonist's mind as a result of his associations with Beatrice and the other communicants in Paradise.  The following verses show that just as Dante's mind has been read by these heavenly beings, he is becoming a bit of a mind reader himself, anticipating that a spirit is about to address him, by what might be called a mirroring of moods.  From these exalted ones he is becoming exultant.

22  Even as sometimes here do we behold
23  The affection in the look, if it be such
24  That all the soul is wrapt away by it,

22  Come si vede qui alcuna volta
23  l'affetto ne la vista, s'elli è tanto,
24  che da lui sia tutta l'anima tolta,

25  So, by the flaming of the effulgence holy
26   To which I turned, I recognized therein
27  The wish of speaking to me somewhat farther.

25  così nel fiammeggiar del folgór santo,
26  a ch'io mi volsi, conobbi la voglia
27  in lui di ragionarmi ancora alquanto.

I cannot really leave this canto without commenting on the almost retrograde denunciations of the current political and ecclesiastical corruption of Dante's historical situation.  His idiom giving us the corrupt Vicars of Christ, the evil popes, personas of a type which tragically seem to recur in every generation.  These denunciations pose a very startling consideration.  Can paradise tolerate emotions of sadness or indignation, or for that matter, any number of emotions which we might consider to be negative.  Another way to phrase this: Can what we conceive of as justice even exist without the presence of injustice?  That these are moral questions is obvious, that they might also be aesthetical questions, wherein harmony is a process by which the static or chaos of inharmonies seem most surprising, most satisfying, and most inspiring when these attributes of chaos become elegant elements of expression.  At the end of the canto the metaphor which exemplifies this is that Peter and Paul are not passé historical figures, but living spiritual beings with an appetite for justice and aesthetic exultation. 

1  Now was alone rejoicing in its word
2  That soul beatified, and I was tasting
3  My own, the bitter tempering with the sweet,

1  Già si godeva solo del suo verbo
2  quello specchio beato, e io gustava
3  lo mio, temprando col dolce l'acerbo;

4  And the Lady who to God was leading me
5  Said: "Change thy thought; consider that I am
6  Near unto Him who every wrong disburdens."

4  e quella donna ch'a Dio mi menava
5  disse: “Muta pensier; pensa ch'i' sono
6  presso a colui ch'ogne torto disgrava.”

7  Unto the loving accents of my comfort
8  I turned me round, and then what love I saw
9  Within those holy eyes I here relinquish;

7  Io mi rivolsi a l'amoroso suono
8  del mio conforto; e qual io allor vidi
9  ne li occhi santi amor, qui l'abbandono:

10  Not only that my language I distrust,
11  But that my mind cannot return so far
12  Above itself, unless another guide it.

10  non perch' io pur del mio parlar diffidi,
11  ma per la mente che non può redire
12  sovra sé tanto, s'altri non la guidi.

13  Thus much upon that point can I repeat,
14  That, her again beholding, my affection
15  From every other longing was released.

13  Tanto poss' io di quel punto ridire,
14  che, rimirando lei, lo mio affetto
15  libero fu da ogne altro disire,

16  While the eternal pleasure, which direct
17  Rayed upon Beatrice, from her fair face
18  Contented me with its reflected aspect,

16  fin che 'l piacere etterno, che diretto
17  raggiava in Bëatrice, dal bel viso
18  mi contentava col secondo aspetto.

19  Conquering me with the radiance of a smile,
20  She said to me, "Turn thee about and listen;
21  Not in mine eyes alone is Paradise."

19  Vincendo me col lume d'un sorriso,
20  ella mi disse: “Volgiti e ascolta;
21  ché non pur ne' miei occhi è paradiso.”

22  Even as sometimes here do we behold
23  The affection in the look, if it be such
24  That all the soul is wrapt away by it,

22  Come si vede qui alcuna volta
23  l'affetto ne la vista, s'elli è tanto,
24  che da lui sia tutta l'anima tolta,

25  So, by the flaming of the effulgence holy
26   To which I turned, I recognized therein
27  The wish of speaking to me somewhat farther.

25  così nel fiammeggiar del folgór santo,
26  a ch'io mi volsi, conobbi la voglia
27  in lui di ragionarmi ancora alquanto.

28  And it began: "In this fifth resting-place
29  Upon the tree that liveth by its summit,
30  And aye bears fruit, and never loses leaf,

28  El cominciò: “In questa quinta soglia
29  de l'albero che vive de la cima
30  e frutta sempre e mai non perde foglia,

31  Are blessed spirits that below, ere yet
32  They came to Heaven, were of such great renown
33  That every Muse therewith would affluent be.

31  spiriti son beati, che giù, prima
32  che venissero al ciel, fuor di gran voce,
33  sì ch'ogne musa ne sarebbe opima.

34  Therefore look thou upon the cross's horns;
35  He whom I now shall name will there enact
36  What doth within a cloud its own swift fire."

34  Però mira ne' corni de la croce:
35  quello ch'io nomerò, lì farà l'atto
36  che fa in nube il suo foco veloce.”

37  I saw athwart the Cross a splendour drawn
38  By naming Joshua, (even as he did it,)
39  Nor noted I the word before the deed;

37  Io vidi per la croce un lume tratto
38  dal nomar Iosuè, com' el si feo;
39  né mi fu noto il dir prima che 'l fatto.

40  And at the name of the great Maccabee
41  I saw another move itself revolving,
42  And gladness was the whip unto that top.

40  E al nome de l'alto Macabeo
41  vidi moversi un altro roteando,
42  e letizia era ferza del paleo.

43  Likewise for Charlemagne and for Orlando,
44  Two of them my regard attentive followed
45  As followeth the eye its falcon flying.

43  Così per Carlo Magno e per Orlando
44  due ne seguì lo mio attento sguardo,
45  com' occhio segue suo falcon volando.

46  William thereafterward, and Renouard,
47  And the Duke Godfrey, did attract my sight
48  Along upon that Cross, and Robert Guiscard.

46  Poscia trasse Guiglielmo e Rinoardo
47  e 'l duca Gottifredi la mia vista
48  per quella croce, e Ruberto Guiscardo.

49  Then, moved and mingled with the other lights,
50  The soul that had addressed me showed how great
51  An artist 'twas among the heavenly singers.

49  Indi, tra l'altre luci mota e mista,
50  mostrommi l'alma che m'avea parlato
51  qual era tra i cantor del cielo artista.

52  To my right side I turned myself around,
53  My duty to behold in Beatrice
54  Either by words or gesture signified;

52  Io mi rivolsi dal mio destro lato
53  per vedere in Beatrice il mio dovere,
54  o per parlare o per atto, segnato;

55  And so translucent I beheld her eyes,
56  So full of pleasure, that her countenance
57  Surpassed its other and its latest wont.

55  e vidi le sue luci tanto mere,
56  tanto gioconde, che la sua sembianza
57  vinceva li altri e l'ultimo solere.

58  And as, by feeling greater delectation,
59  A man in doing good from day to day
60  Becomes aware his virtue is increasing,

58  E come, per sentir più dilettanza
59  bene operando, l'uom di giorno in giorno
60  s'accorge che la sua virtute avanza,

61  So I became aware that my gyration
62  With heaven together had increased its arc,
63  That miracle beholding more adorned.

61  sì m'accors' io che 'l mio girare intorno
62  col cielo insieme avea cresciuto l'arco,
63  veggendo quel miracol più addorno.

64  And such as is the change, in little lapse
65  Of time, in a pale woman, when her face
66  Is from the load of bashfulness unladen,

64  E qual è 'l trasmutare in picciol varco
65  di tempo in bianca donna, quando 'l volto
66  suo si discarchi di vergogna il carco,

67  Such was it in mine eyes, when I had turned,
68  Caused by the whiteness of the temperate star,
69  The sixth, which to itself had gathered me.

67  tal fu ne li occhi miei, quando fui vòlto,
68  per lo candor de la temprata stella
69  sesta, che dentro a sé m'avea ricolto.

70  Within that Jovial torch did I behold
71  The sparkling of the love which was therein
72  Delineate our language to mine eyes.

70  Io vidi in quella giovïal facella
71  lo sfavillar de l'amor che lì era
72  segnare a li occhi miei nostra favella.

73  And even as birds uprisen from the shore,
74  As in congratulation o'er their food,
75  Make squadrons of themselves, now round, now long,

73  E come augelli surti di rivera,
74  quasi congratulando a lor pasture,
75  fanno di sé or tonda or altra schiera,

76  So from within those lights the holy creatures
77  Sang flying to and fro, and in their figures
78  Made of themselves now D, now I, now L.

76  sì dentro ai lumi sante creature
77  volitando cantavano, e faciensi
78  or D, or I, or L in sue figure.

79  First singing they to their own music moved;
80  Then one becoming of these characters,
81  A little while they rested and were silent.

79  Prima, cantando, a sua nota moviensi;
80  poi, diventando l'un di questi segni,
81  un poco s'arrestavano e taciensi.

82  O divine Pegasea, thou who genius
83  Dost glorious make, and render it long-lived,
84  And this through thee the cities and the kingdoms,

82  O diva Pegasëa che li 'ngegni
83  fai glorïosi e rendili longevi,
84  ed essi teco le cittadi e ' regni,

85  Illume me with thyself, that I may bring
86  Their figures out as I have them conceived!
87  Apparent be thy power in these brief verses!

85  illustrami di te, sì ch'io rilevi
86  le lor figure com' io l'ho concette:
87  paia tua possa in questi versi brevi!

88  Themselves then they displayed in five times seven
89  Vowels and consonants; and I observed
90  The parts as they seemed spoken unto me.

88  Mostrarsi dunque in cinque volte sette
89  vocali e consonanti; e io notai
90  le parti sì, come mi parver dette.

91  'Diligite justitiam,' these were
92  First verb and noun of all that was depicted;
93  'Qui judicatis terram' were the last.

91  “DILIGITE IUSTITIAM,” primai
92  fur verbo e nome di tutto 'l dipinto;
93  “QUI IUDICATIS TERRAM,” fur sezzai.

94  Thereafter in the M of the fifth word
95  Remained they so arranged, that Jupiter
96  Seemed to be silver there with gold inlaid.

94  Poscia ne l'emme del vocabol quinto
95  rimasero ordinate; sì che Giove
96  pareva argento lì d'oro distinto.

97  And other lights I saw descend where was
98  The summit of the M, and pause there singing
99  The good, I think, that draws them to itself.
97  E vidi scendere altre luci dove
98  era il colmo de l'emme, e lì quetarsi
99  cantando, credo, il ben ch'a sé le move.

100  Then, as in striking upon burning logs
101  Upward there fly innumerable sparks,
102  Whence fools are wont to look for auguries,

100  Poi, come nel percuoter d'i ciocchi arsi
101  surgono innumerabili faville,
102  onde li stolti sogliono agurarsi,

103  More than a thousand lights seemed thence to rise,
104  And to ascend, some more, and others less,
105  Even as the Sun that lights them had allotted;

103  resurger parver quindi più di mille
104  luci e salir, qual assai e qual poco,
105  sì come 'l sol che l'accende sortille;

106  And, each one being quiet in its place,
107  The head and neck beheld I of an eagle
108  Delineated by that inlaid fire.

106  e quïetata ciascuna in suo loco,
107  la testa e 'l collo d'un'aguglia vidi
108  rappresentare a quel distinto foco.

109  He who there paints has none to be his guide;
110  But Himself guides; and is from Him remembered
111  That virtue which is form unto the nest.

109  Quei che dipinge lì, non ha chi 'l guidi;
110  ma esso guida, e da lui si rammenta
111  quella virtù ch'è forma per li nidi.

112  The other beatitude, that contented seemed
113  At first to bloom a lily on the M,
114  By a slight motion followed out the imprint.

112  L'altra bëatitudo, che contenta
113  pareva prima d'ingigliarsi a l'emme,
114  con poco moto seguitò la 'mprenta.

115  O gentle star! what and how many gems
116  Did demonstrate to me, that all our justice
117  Effect is of that heaven which thou ingemmest!

115  O dolce stella, quali e quante gemme
116  mi dimostraro che nostra giustizia
117  effetto sia del ciel che tu ingemme!

118  Wherefore I pray the Mind, in which begin
119  Thy motion and thy virtue, to regard
120  Whence comes the smoke that vitiates thy rays;

118  Per ch'io prego la mente in che s'inizia
119  tuo moto e tua virtute, che rimiri
120  ond' esce il fummo che 'l tuo raggio vizia;

121  So that a second time it now be wroth
122  With buying and with selling in the temple
123  Whose walls were built with signs and martyrdoms!

121  sì ch'un'altra fiata omai s'adiri
122  del comperare e vender dentro al templo
123  che si murò di segni e di martìri.

124  O soldiery of heaven, whom I contemplate,
125  Implore for those who are upon the earth
126  All gone astray after the bad example!

124  O milizia del ciel cu' io contemplo,
125  adora per color che sono in terra
126  tutti svïati dietro al malo essemplo!

127  Once 'twas the custom to make war with swords;
128  But now 'tis made by taking here and there
129  The bread the pitying Father shuts from none.

127  Già si solea con le spade far guerra;
128  ma or si fa togliendo or qui or quivi
129  lo pan che 'l pïo Padre a nessun serra.

130  Yet thou, who writest but to cancel, think
131  That Peter and that Paul, who for this vineyard
132  Which thou art spoiling died, are still alive!

130  Ma tu che sol per cancellare scrivi,
131  pensa che Pietro e Paulo, che moriro
132  per la vigna che guasti, ancor son vivi.

133  Well canst thou say: "So steadfast my desire
134  Is unto him who willed to live alone,
135  And for a dance was led to martyrdom,

133  Ben puoi tu dire: “I' ho fermo 'l disiro
134  sì a colui che volle viver solo
135  e che per salti fu tratto al martiro,

136  That I know not the Fisherman nor Paul."

136  ch'io non conosco il pescator né Polo.”

Canto XIX
Just as there is the protagonist Dante, the aspirant/pilgrim, and the poet Dante, the exile/nomad/mystic/lover/poet, there is this fight in the soul of the poem that plays out in Paradise as a conflict between the presentation of an astonishing spectacle backdropped by a dark philosophical didacticism.   This canto aims to answer some age-old bugaboos undermining the pretense of a just and merciful Christian God.  How can God, who is omniscient and all-good, on the basis of the historical or geographical conditions which He Himself has made, exclude souls from Heaven or condemn them to Hell?  The spectacles that we see and the love and joy that we feel in the Christian Paradise of the Commedia are transporting, and although they seem to render these insoluble philosophical doubts irrelevant, as the aspirant is overwhelmed by ecstatic wonder, these points, like a burr that has gotten under the skin of logic, keep re-festering.  On the surface, the Eagle's attempt to resolve them is just a reiteration of the Cyclonic God's bluster in the Book of Job, where the question of morality and justice is simply side-stepped.  All such impertinent questioning quails to a quivering insignificance when confronted by the Divine's awesome creative power.  Illogically, that power here is equated with an unassailable wisdom.  Here, the philosophical question of justice is simply blotted out by the glare of a blinding spectacle, the mere posing of the conundrum derided by the Eagle as a demonstration of the questioner's ignorance and the Divine's inscrutability.  This inscrutability is the twin of the theme of ineffability.  And if we present it as an attribute of the fight that we proposed at the beginning of this paragraph, then we see that what is being demonstrated here is that the very core of our being, and of beingness itself, is hidden, shrouded in darkness or obliterated by light, and it is the height of either arrogance or of naivite to attempt to express or explain it.  We are asked by the Eagle — a composite being, which, or rather who, is a Phoenix arising from the ruby lights of the souls of just rulers — to imagine Christian Justice as a geometrical figure, not in its outward shape, but in its movements, which form a circle.   The metaphor of drawing with a compass in verses 40 - 42 makes this clear, as do the reference to the circling stork in lines 91 - 93, and the wheeling ("roteando") Eagle in line 97.  Note too the dual avian references: a stork or birth emblem, and the raptor eagle, the potent enforcer.  The inner nature of the Phoenix is dynamic, and like true justice, assumes the role that is most required to achieve not only balance, but the intense joy that comes from this coherent harmony.  The intermingling of these composite joys is like the intermingling of a field of flowers (verses 22 - 24) to make one delicious perfume, this but one of many "hidden" operations of divine justice, which reveal what seems varied and even violently contradictory as a single melded exultation.  (For an contemporary materialistic and evolutionary exposition of how the trillions of cells and bacteria of a human body are able to operate in an apparent unity see Rodolfo R. Llinás' book i of the vortex: From Neurons to Self.)   Inside the  circumference this metaphorical circle is a shining darkness of impenetrable mystery, in Christian theology, this circle is curiously centered at the point of the historical birth of Jesus.  This mystery spot is assumed to be void of the consequences of suffering, pain, and death due to a likewise historical center of last judgement and salvation.  These two points are one: the birth of Jesus and this last judgement.  They are the famous center which is everywhere and whose circumference is nowhere.  Outside the membrane of this living cell is mere superfluity: incoherence, decoherence, dissonance, chaos, pox, plague — a superfluity incapable by its very placement as the other side of the line of the circle's circumference of ever entering the inner circle without destroying the very concept of completeness which the symbolic geometry of the circle embodies.  How astonishing to imagine that the essence of Judgment cannot be a moral or legal code, which essentially could not be anything other than a list of precepts, like the Mosaic Covenant of the Ten Commandments, but must instead be a geometric creation that defines, by means of its very spherical shape — Wholeness. (For an in depth 21st Century exploration of this idea, see Peter Sloterdijk's monumental trilogy Spheres.)  The question presented here is not merely psychological, but lies at the very heart of the epistemology of knowledge.  In this case, whatever falls outside of or at the obscure dot of the center is always beyond the domain of the knowable.  If we see here an analogy of the unknowable, inscrutable, and the ineffable, we might feel the uneasy encroachment of a mysterious shadow spreading forth from the light of the Christian trinity, not a squaring of the circle, but some sort of impossible to conceive Buckminster Fullerish triangulation of it.

I am aware that these comments go beyond anything explicitly stated in this canto, except as the overall inferences to be derived from the imagery and structural shapes of turning and counter-turning presented as the very armature of the poem.  Everything on the surface here is simply the orthodox Christian position regarding the nature of God's Judgements as they pertain to the salvation or damnation of Christian, pre-Christian, and un-Christian souls.  (Although in the next canto, we see that God is the arbiter of salvation, not God's Word or Law, and not time, circumstance, or geography, all of which, as the Eagle takes pains to relate, are circumstantial temporal issues, pertaining to God's Creation, which God Himself in his omnipotent, omniscient essence, far exceeds, and is not bound by.)  So, surely our experience of reading the poem invariably tempts us to consider that Dante is always a more subtle thinker than any surface reading suggests.  In brief, if the reader accepts this premise as a given, then peering into substructures and penumbras seems always to set the mind and heart, like the nomad/ exile of a true aspirant, into unexplored areas of speculation.  Perhaps Dante, the Christian, would be appalled by such blasphemies, but it may be that the more devious and questioning persona of Dante the poet would be intrigued by them.  My evidence for these speculations is tenuous, and admittedly based upon an unreasonable faith — as suggested here that the protagonist accept — that the unknowable, the inscrutable, and the ineffable can still be hinted at, if not overtly defined, by the very virtue that poetry — above physics, theology, psychology, cosmology, philosophy or history — can subtly suggest what cannot be overtly stated.  Its net of mists and vapors is aptly suited to caress into sound and image the unknowable, the inscrutable, and even the so-called ineffable. 

What is hidden from human view is embodied in the content and structure of this canto.  The song of the Eagle is unheard — like a dog whistle to a human.  Likewise, the litany of damnable kings is mostly presented in a paraphrastic fashion without in most case naming names.  This is the technique perhaps unique to poetry, and especially to Dante's mastery of the artful science of poetry, by which it also embodies ignorance, by which it implies that which is discoverable and that which is not.  And the acrostic of LVE beginning the tercets from verses 115 - 139 which spell "lue," that is, "plague" or "pox" are a way to show what is hidden, ineffable.  However, with the right tilt of vision or reading of the poem, indeed the ineffable can be read.  In this case it is read as political corruption, an infectious, fatal disease of running sores that from place to place, age to age, infects the ego-bound, arrogant political leaders in Dante's world, whose disease is both an inner and outer punishment which administers its own inherent justice not by means of a human agency of a prescribed and enforced set of laws, but rather by a the deep inner workings of conscience, whose operations are only discernable by those who have attained what has often been referred to as "Christ Consciousness."  So now we return to the spectacle, because the spectacle of the composite being is none other than that consciousness in which the truly, not merely "nominally," saved, enjoy in their oneness the cosmic joy of existence itself.

No one reaches the level of joy attained by the spirits in this canto without knowledge of Christ, and Dante, the aspirant, asks, "Is this just?"  The idea here is that even in our limited temporal life as a person, the essence of justice can manifest itself in our being, although not in our limited ideas about being.  By this means a person is Christed — a verb that denotes the realization of the joy of these just spirits.  Without this Christing, no person in their limited human — one might even say — animal self — for the human is an animal, but one which has forgone animal innocence in his arrogant ambition to contemplate the meanings and actions of the cosmos with only animal faculties — an animal endowed, in brief, with the distinguishing and abrogated features of guilt, of pride, and of shame.  No such person, infected with such attributes, can attain to the level of ecstasy which is expressed by the spirits in this canto who have willingly, even rationally, surrendered their human/animal concepts of justice to that greater, unknowable — from a human point of view — process of cosmic justice.  Here it might be better to say that Jesus is not the only one Christed, but rather one of any number of humans who have fully accepted his human self as One with the Divine.  Such a Christed human has stepped into that circle of joy whose center is everywhere and in every point inside himself, and whose circumference is everywhere manifested as another manifestation, however mysterious, of the Divine.  What this Divine "knows" is its joy, its brilliance, and its creative power, and it is this innate knowledge which allows the Divine to be Divine, to be the embodiment, the encyclopedia (encyclopedia means circle or circulation of wisdom) of all possible knowledge as the ever evolving and revolving expression of ITs love.  Inside this circle is salvation, outside it is damnation, and the line or membrane which defines the two domains is that verb Christed.  The Eagle in this canto uses this word, as the personhood of Christ, not the person of Jesus, although in their geometric motion they travel the same path and are thus one and the same.  What the Commedia illustrates here is that Justice has a boundary, a boundary which might be temporal — those born before the manifestation of the Christed person; or geographic — those born in a place where the possibility of the Christed person is unknown; or moral — those who by their own actions and beliefs have excluded themselves from the possibility of being Christed.  There is another idea inherent in this Christing, but one that in this canto is only inferred, which is, that from the human/animal side of the circle no movement towards inclusion is possible, that is human/animal justice is always tainted with the injustice of human/animal limitations.  So it is, that the grace of salvation, one's inclusion in this ecstatic circle, must always come about by the embrace of the Divine.  It is the cosmic Christed Self which is fit to judge because its Justice is the essence of its own being.  Justice alone knows the Just and Justice alone can include the human/animal as one with the human/Christed.  When the human qua animal abrogates the function of justice, that arrogance, that pride, however well-meaning, is always outside the circle, always a form of poxy incoherence.  Grace alone, that grace which is magnetically attracted by our humility, is the arbiter of a kind of Justice whose exultation is not infected by its opposite: injustice.  As far as Justice is concerned, our pride designates the limit of our perceptions.  Our pride puts us beyond the pale.  The Eagle/Phoenix gives the aspirant — and by extension — the reader, a dressing down, even a sort of humiliation, because it is only by surrendering our own human/animal concept of Justice that the soul may be included in that ever-circling, and always harmonizing light of composite, joyful unity.

1  Appeared before me with its wings outspread
2  The beautiful image that in sweet fruition
3  Made jubilant the interwoven souls;

1  Parea dinanzi a me con l'ali aperte
2  la bella image che nel dolce frui
3  liete facevan l'anime conserte;

4  Appeared a little ruby each, wherein
5  Ray of the sun was burning so enkindled
6  That each into mine eyes refracted it.

4  parea ciascuna rubinetto in cui
5  raggio di sole ardesse sì acceso,
6  che ne' miei occhi rifrangesse lui.

7  And what it now behoves me to retrace
8  Nor voice has e'er reported, nor ink written,
9  Nor was by fantasy e'er comprehended;

7  E quel che mi convien ritrar testeso,
8  non portò voce mai, né scrisse incostro,
9  né fu per fantasia già mai compreso;

10  For speak I saw, and likewise heard, the beak,
11  And utter with its voice both 'I' and 'My,'
12  When in conception it was 'We' and 'Our.'

10  ch'io vidi e anche udi' parlar lo rostro,
11  e sonar ne la voce e “io” e “mio,”
12  quand' era nel concetto e “noi” e “nostro.”

13  And it began: "Being just and merciful
14  Am I exalted here unto that glory
15  Which cannot be exceeded by desire;

13  E cominciò: “Per esser giusto e pio
14  son io qui essaltato a quella gloria
15  che non si lascia vincere a disio;

16  And upon earth I left my memory
17  Such, that the evil-minded people there
18  Commend it, but continue not the story."

16  e in terra lasciai la mia memoria
17  sì fatta, che le genti lì malvage
18  commendan lei, ma non seguon la storia.”

19  So doth a single heat from many embers
20  Make itself felt, even as from many loves
21  Issued a single sound from out that image.

19  Così un sol calor di molte brage
20  si fa sentir, come di molti amori
21  usciva solo un suon di quella image.

22  Whence I thereafter: "O perpetual flowers
23  Of the eternal joy, that only one
24  Make me perceive your odours manifold,

22  Ond' io appresso: “O perpetüi fiori
23  de l'etterna letizia, che pur uno
24  parer mi fate tutti vostri odori,

25  Exhaling, break within me the great fast
26  Which a long season has in hunger held me,
27  Not finding for it any food on earth.

25  solvetemi, spirando, il gran digiuno
26  che lungamente m'ha tenuto in fame,
27  non trovandoli in terra cibo alcuno.

28  Well do I know, that if in heaven its mirror
29  Justice Divine another realm doth make,
30  Yours apprehends it not through any veil.

28  Ben so io che, se 'n cielo altro reame
29  la divina giustizia fa suo specchio,
30  che 'l vostro non l'apprende con velame.

31  You know how I attentively address me
32  To listen; and you know what is the doubt
33  That is in me so very old a fast."

31  Sapete come attento io m'apparecchio
32  ad ascoltar; sapete qual è quello
33  dubbio che m'è digiun cotanto vecchio.”

34  Even as a falcon, issuing from his hood,
35  Doth move his head, and with his wings applaud him,
36  Showing desire, and making himself fine,

34  Quasi falcone ch'esce del cappello,
35  move la testa e con l'ali si plaude,
36  voglia mostrando e faccendosi bello,

37  Saw I become that standard, which of lauds
38  Was interwoven of the grace divine,
39  With such songs as he knows who there rejoices.

37  vid' io farsi quel segno, che di laude
38  de la divina grazia era contesto,
39  con canti quai si sa chi là sù gaude.

40  Then it began: "He who a compass turned
41  On the world's outer verge, and who within it
42  Devised so much occult and manifest,

40  Poi cominciò: “Colui che volse il sesto
41  a lo stremo del mondo, e dentro ad esso
42  distinse tanto occulto e manifesto,

43  Could not the impress of his power so make
44  On all the universe, as that his Word
45  Should not remain in infinite excess.

43  non poté suo valor sì fare impresso
44  in tutto l'universo, che 'l suo verbo
45  non rimanesse in infinito eccesso.

46  And this makes certain that the first proud being,
47  Who was the paragon of every creature,
48  By not awaiting light fell immature.

46  E ciò fa certo che 'l primo superbo,
47  che fu la somma d'ogne creatura,
48  per non aspettar lume, cadde acerbo;

49  And hence appears it, that each minor nature
50   Is scant receptacle unto that good
51  Which has no end, and by itself is measured.

49  e quinci appar ch'ogne minor natura
50  è corto recettacolo a quel bene
51  che non ha fine e sé con sé misura.

52  In consequence our vision, which perforce
53  Must be some ray of that intelligence
54  With which all things whatever are replete,

52  Dunque vostra veduta, che convene
53  essere alcun de' raggi de la mente
54  di che tutte le cose son ripiene,
55  Cannot in its own nature be so potent,
56  That it shall not its origin discern
57  Far beyond that which is apparent to it.

55  non pò da sua natura esser possente
56  tanto, che suo principio non discerna
57  molto di là da quel che l'è parvente.

58  Therefore into the justice sempiternal
59  The power of vision that your world receives,
60  As eye into the ocean, penetrates;

58  Però ne la giustizia sempiterna
59  la vista che riceve il vostro mondo,
60  com' occhio per lo mare, entro s'interna;

61  Which, though it see the bottom near the shore,
62  Upon the deep perceives it not, and yet
63  'Tis there, but it is hidden by the depth.

61  che, ben che da la proda veggia il fondo,
62  in pelago nol vede; e nondimeno
63  èli, ma cela lui l'esser profondo.

64  There is no light but comes from the serene
65  That never is o'ercast, nay, it is darkness
66  Or shadow of the flesh, or else its poison.

64  Lume non è, se non vien dal sereno
65  che non si turba mai; anzi è tenèbra
66  od ombra de la carne o suo veleno.

67  Amply to thee is opened now the cavern
68  Which has concealed from thee the living justice
69  Of which thou mad'st such frequent questioning.

67  Assai t'è mo aperta la latebra
68  che t'ascondeva la giustizia viva,
69  di che facei question cotanto crebra;

70  For saidst thou: 'Born a man is on the shore
71  Of Indus, and is none who there can speak
72  Of Christ, nor who can read, nor who can write;

70  ché tu dicevi: 'Un uom nasce a la riva
71  de l'Indo, e quivi non è chi ragioni
72  di Cristo né chi legga né chi scriva;

73  And all his inclinations and his actions
74  Are good, so far as human reason sees,
75  Without a sin in life or in discourse:

73  e tutti suoi voleri e atti buoni
74  sono, quanto ragione umana vede,
75  sanza peccato in vita o in sermoni.

76  He dieth unbaptised and without faith;
77  Where is this justice that condemneth him?
78  Where is his fault, if he do not believe?'

76  Muore non battezzato e sanza fede:
77  ov' è questa giustizia che 'l condanna?
77  ov' è la colpa sua, se ei non crede?'

79  Now who art thou, that on the bench wouldst sit
80  In judgment at a thousand miles away,
81  With the short vision of a single span?

79  Or tu chi se', che vuo' sedere a scranna,
80  per giudicar di lungi mille miglia
81  con la veduta corta d'una spanna?

82  Truly to him who with me subtilizes,
83  If so the Scripture were not over you,
84  For doubting there were marvellous occasion.

82  Certo a colui che meco s'assottiglia,
83  se la Scrittura sovra voi non fosse,
84  da dubitar sarebbe a maraviglia.

85  O animals terrene, O stolid minds,
86  The primal will, that in itself is good,
87  Ne'er from itself, the Good Supreme, has moved.

85  Oh terreni animali! oh menti grosse!
86  La prima volontà, ch'è da sé buona,
87  da sé, ch'è sommo ben, mai non si mosse.

88  So much is just as is accordant with it;
89  No good created draws it to itself,
89  But it, by raying forth, occasions that."

88  Cotanto è giusto quanto a lei consuona:
89  nullo creato bene a sé la tira,
90  ma essa, radïando, lui cagiona.”

91  Even as above her nest goes circling round
92  The stork when she has fed her little ones,
93  And he who has been fed looks up at her,

91  Quale sovresso il nido si rigira
92  poi c'ha pasciuti la cicogna i figli,
93  e come quel ch'è pasto la rimira;

94  So lifted I my brows, and even such
95  Became the blessed image, which its wings
96  Was moving, by so many counsels urged.

94  cotal si fece, e sì leväi i cigli,
95  la benedetta imagine, che l'ali
96  movea sospinte da tanti consigli.

97  Circling around it sang, and said: "As are
98  My notes to thee, who dost not comprehend them,
99  Such is the eternal judgment to you mortals."

97  Roteando cantava, e dicea: “Quali
98  son le mie note a te, che non le 'ntendi,
99  tal è il giudicio etterno a voi mortali.”

100  Those lucent splendours of the Holy Spirit
101  Grew quiet then, but still within the standard
102  That made the Romans reverend to the world.

100  Poi si quetaro quei lucenti incendi
101  de lo Spirito Santo ancor nel segno
102 che fé i Romani al mondo reverendi,

103  It recommenced: "Unto this kingdom never
104  Ascended one who had not faith in Christ,
105  Before or since he to the tree was nailed.

103  esso ricominciò: “A questo regno
104  non salì mai chi non credette 'n Cristo,
105  né pria né poi ch'el si chiavasse al legno.

106  But look thou, many crying are, 'Christ, Christ!'
107  Who at the judgment shall be far less near
108  To him than some shall be who knew not Christ.

106  Ma vedi: molti gridan 'Cristo, Cristo!'
107  che saranno in giudicio assai men prope
108  a lui, che tal che non conosce Cristo;

109  Such Christians shall the Ethiop condemn,
110  When the two companies shall be divided,
111  The one for ever rich, the other poor.

109  e tai Cristian dannerà l'Etïòpe,
110  quando si partiranno i due collegi,
111  l'uno in etterno ricco e l'altro inòpe.

112  What to your kings may not the Persians say,
113  When they that volume opened shall behold
114  In which are written down all their dispraises?

112  Che poran dir li Perse a' vostri regi,
113  come vedranno quel volume aperto
114  nel qual si scrivon tutti suoi dispregi?

116  There shall be seen, among the deeds of Albert,
117  That which ere long shall set the pen in motion,
118  For which the realm of Prague shall be deserted.

115  Lì si vedrà, tra l'opere d'Alberto,
116  quella che tosto moverà la penna,
117  per che 'l regno di Praga fia diserto.

118  There shall be seen the woe that on the Seine
119  He brings by falsifying of the coin,
120  Who by the blow of a wild boar shall die.

118  Lì si vedrà il duol che sovra Senna
119  induce, falseggiando la moneta,
120  quel che morrà di colpo di cotenna.

121  There shall be seen the pride that causes thirst,
122  Which makes the Scot and Englishman so mad
123  That they within their boundaries cannot rest;

121  Lì si vedrà la superbia ch'asseta,
122  che fa lo Scotto e l'Inghilese folle,
123  sì che non può soffrir dentro a sua meta.

124  Be seen the luxury and effeminate life
125  Of him of Spain, and the Bohemian,
126  Who valour never knew and never wished;

124  Vedrassi la lussuria e 'l viver molle
125  di quel di Spagna e di quel di Boemme,
126  che mai valor non conobbe né volle.

127  Be seen the Cripple of Jerusalem,
128  His goodness represented by an I,
129  While the reverse an M shall represent;

127  Vedrassi al Ciotto di Ierusalemme
128  segnata con un i la sua bontate,
129  quando 'l contrario segnerà un emme.

130  Be seen the avarice and poltroonery
131  Of him who guards the Island of the Fire,
132  Wherein Anchises finished his long life;

130  Vedrassi l'avarizia e la viltate
131  di quei che guarda l'isola del foco,
132  ove Anchise finì la lunga etate;

133  And to declare how pitiful he is
134  Shall be his record in contracted letters
135  Which shall make note of much in little space.

133  e a dare ad intender quanto è poco,
134  la sua scrittura fian lettere mozze,
135  che noteranno molto in parvo loco.

136  And shall appear to each one the foul deeds
137  Of uncle and of brother who a nation
138  So famous have dishonoured, and two crowns.

136  E parranno a ciascun l'opere sozze
137  del barba e del fratel, che tanto egregia
138  nazione e due corone han fatte bozze.

139  And he of Portugal and he of Norway
140  Shall there be known, and he of Rascia too,
141  Who saw in evil hour the coin of Venice.

139  E quel di Portogallo e di Norvegia
140  lì si conosceranno, e quel di Rascia
141  che male ha visto il conio di Vinegia.

142  O happy Hungary, if she let herself
143  Be wronged no farther! and Navarre the happy,
144  If with the hills that gird her she be armed!

142  O beata Ungheria, se non si lascia
143  più malmenare! e beata Navarra,
144  se s'armasse del monte che la fascia!

145  And each one may believe that now, as hansel
146  Thereof, do Nicosia and Famagosta
147  Lament and rage because of their own beast,

145  E creder de' ciascun che già, per arra
146  di questo, Niccosïa e Famagosta
147  per la lor bestia si lamenti e garra,

148  Who from the others' flank departeth not."

148  che dal fianco de l'altre non si scosta.”

Canto XX
And he said unto them: wheresoever the body is, thither will be eagles gathered together.

Luke 17: 37.

Justice, human; Justice, Divine; Geometry as absolute proportionality; Geometry as a juxtaposition of propinquity and distance; where is this in relation to where is that; the question of the specificities and contingencies of places and times, whose fixity seems deterministic, even in a legal sense, as natural and moral laws; and the question of the ubiquity of a unified intelligence of a cosmic Mind.  This canto tells us that Divine Justice is not bound by contingencies, and is not that which is defined as a pair of opposites: Just and Unjust.  Dante's poem knows more than Dante's person.  That is a shock, since a poem by human logic is the product of its poet.  But the reverse is true, and must be true, otherwise the poet would learn nothing from his own inspiration/intuition, and in an analogous sense, human justice can never be the arbiter of Divine Justice, for it is the later which must always inform the former by virtue, not of what we deduce what should be, but as we perceive what is.  That the eagle is the composite vision of all those who have, in various places and times, imagined and executed that which they intuit is just.  Yet even if we compound all these visions together, their total composite can still not penetrate the unfathomable, for it is out of that depth that the virtues of their justice emerge, so it can never be their own vision, however far-seeing and acute, which can ever create that depth.  Divine Justice may create contingencies from its own will, but can never be bound by those contingencies which it has created.  In this canto we see how that Divine Justice has created impossible events in violation of theological precepts and Natural Laws.  Geometrically speaking, it — or HE — has gone beyond the boundaries which HE has set for his creatures in creation, because his criteria for creativity are as infinite as is HE, and his freedom to employ that creativity is Just because it is absolute and inviolable.  This is why both in the Book of Job and in the previous canto the Divine Will insists that Justice is not a moral code of right and wrong, just and unjust, but is the product of this absolute creative freedom.  Another way to say this is that everything we see and name as an instance of justice has its ultimate source, not in law, which is both blind and binding, but in this creative freedom.

This canto is about focus, the metaphor: the eye of the eagle, which contains the 6 spirits of the just rulers — exposited in 36 verses, in 6 tercets, each of 6 lines.  These are arranged in a five-pointed arc, which define the top of the eye, symmetrically placed atop the pupil of the eye, which is the pre-Christian: King David.  The figures are not arranged chronologically, and in fact neither the logic of historical time, nor even the logic that the exemplars devoted to just rulers would all be rulers, or even real people in history.  The rulers are Trajan, because he showed mercy on a humble widow; Hezekiah, because he was penitent; Constantine, because he had good intentions, although according to Dante his gift of lands to the Church initiated centuries of ecclesiastical corruption and the church's usurpation of temporal power; William the Good, who died young, but was mourned as a just ruler; and most astonishing of all, Ripheus, the Trojan, a character mentioned only briefly in Virgil's Aeneid.  None of these, according the Eagle's pronouncements in the previous canto, with the possible exception of Constantine, have any business being in Paradise.  But they're here in what only can be described as the most bizarre and miraculous of circumstances, circumstances which include death, resurrection, the backwards looping of the arrow of time, and in the case of Ripheus, the canonization of a fictional person who was pagan, not a ruler, and like William the Good, not famous (as a previous Paradiso canto asserts that he should be.)!  The reader's focus here is totally blurred when it comes to any temporal, logical — should we say "just,"  explanation, and must instead be fixed  upon God's creative freedom.  This creative freedom is what makes His justice alone infallible, although inscrutable.  Why? Because, as stated above, His justice alone is rooted in his absolute freedom to rise above the rules He has created to govern his universe.  As artists, as readers, as souls trapped in temporal bodies which are subject to physical laws, this should make us whoop for joy, since that part of us which, as we are made in God's image, and so is able to create, is not bound by our past decisions, and is free in every moment to do and be that which in its previous actions, thoughts, and feelings would have been impossible, except for this ability that we each have to enact, against all conditions, the absolutely miraculous.  It should be pointed out here that the Dante who wrote the humanly inconceivable Commedia is a wondrous example of this freedom, and in spite of all the judgements the poem — not the poet —has made, aesthetically it is just, because it is an effort wherein a mere human being has allowed himself to be infused by an inspiration, which can hardly, even in our atheistic condition, be read as anything but Divine.

1  When he who all the world illuminates
2  Out of our hemisphere so far descends
3  That on all sides the daylight is consumed,

1  Quando colui che tutto 'l mondo alluma
2  de l'emisperio nostro sì discende,
3 che 'l giorno d'ogne parte si consuma,

4  The heaven, that erst by him alone was kindled,
5  Doth suddenly reveal itself again
6  By many lights, wherein is one resplendent.

4  lo ciel, che sol di lui prima s'accende,
5  subitamente si rifà parvente
6  per molte luci, in che una risplende;

7  And came into my mind this act of heaven,
8  When the ensign of the world and of its leaders
9  Had silent in the blessed beak become;

7  e questo atto del ciel mi venne a mente,
8  come 'l segno del mondo e de' suoi duci
9  nel benedetto rostro fu tacente;

10  Because those living luminaries all,
11  By far more luminous, did songs begin
12  Lapsing and falling from my memory.

10  però che tutte quelle vive luci,
11  vie più lucendo, cominciaron canti
12  da mia memoria labili e caduci.

13  O gentle Love, that with a smile dost cloak thee,
14  How ardent in those sparks didst thou appear,
15  That had the breath alone of holy thoughts!

13  O dolce amor che di riso t'ammanti,
14  quanto parevi ardente in que' flailli,
15  ch'avieno spirto sol di pensier santi!

16  After the precious and pellucid crystals,
17  With which begemmed the sixth light I beheld,
18  Silence imposed on the angelic bells,

16  Poscia che i cari e lucidi lapilli
17  ond' io vidi ingemmato il sesto lume
18  puoser silenzio a li angelici squilli,

19  I seemed to hear the murmuring of a river
20  That clear descendeth down from rock to rock,
21  Showing the affluence of its mountain-top.

19  udir mi parve un mormorar di fiume
20  che scende chiaro giù di pietra in pietra,
21  mostrando l'ubertà del suo cacume.

22  And as the sound upon the cithern's neck
23  Taketh its form, and as upon the vent
24  Of rustic pipe the wind that enters it,

22  E come suono al collo de la cetra
23  prende sua forma, e sì com' al pertugio
24  de la sampogna vento che penètra,

25  Even thus, relieved from the delay of waiting,
26  That murmuring of the eagle mounted up
27  Along its neck, as if it had been hollow.

25  così, rimosso d'aspettare indugio,
26  quel mormorar de l'aguglia salissi
27  su per lo collo, come fosse bugio.

28  There it became a voice, and issued thence
29  From out its beak, in such a form of words
30   As the heart waited for wherein I wrote them.

28  Fecesi voce quivi, e quindi uscissi
29  per lo suo becco in forma di parole,
30  quali aspettava il core ov' io le scrissi.

31  "The part in me which sees and bears the sun
32  In mortal eagles," it began to me,
33  "Now fixedly must needs be looked upon;

31  “La parte in me che vede e pate il sole
32  ne l'aguglie mortali,” incominciommi,
33  “or fisamente riguardar si vole,

34  For of the fires of which I make my figure,
35  Those whence the eye doth sparkle in my head
36  Of all their orders the supremest are.

34  perché d'i fuochi ond' io figura fommi,
35  quelli onde l'occhio in testa mi scintilla,
36  e' di tutti lor gradi son li sommi.
37  He who is shining in the midst as pupil
38  Was once the singer of the Holy Spirit,
39  Who bore the ark from city unto city;

37  Colui che luce in mezzo per pupilla,
38  fu il cantor de lo Spirito Santo,
39  che l'arca traslatò di villa in villa:

40  Now knoweth he the merit of his song,
41  In so far as effect of his own counsel,
42  By the reward which is commensurate.

40  ora conosce il merto del suo canto,
41  in quanto effetto fu del suo consiglio,
42  per lo remunerar ch'è altrettanto.

43  Of five, that make a circle for my brow,
44  He that approacheth nearest to my beak
45  Did the poor widow for her son console;

43  Dei cinque che mi fan cerchio per ciglio,
44  colui che più al becco mi s'accosta,
45  la vedovella consolò del figlio:

46  Now knoweth he how dearly it doth cost
47  Not following Christ, by the experience
48  Of this sweet life and of its opposite.

46  ora conosce quanto caro costa
47  non seguir Cristo, per l'esperïenza
48  di questa dolce vita e de l'opposta.

49  He who comes next in the circumference
50  Of which I speak, upon its highest arc,
51  Did death postpone by penitence sincere;

49  E quel che segue in la circunferenza
49  di che ragiono, per l'arco superno,
50  morte indugiò per vera penitenza:

52  Now knoweth he that the eternal judgment
53  Suffers no change, albeit worthy prayer
54  Maketh below to-morrow of to-day.

52  ora conosce che 'l giudicio etterno
53  non si trasmuta, quando degno preco
54  fa crastino là giù de l'odïerno.

55  The next who follows, with the laws and me,
56  Under the good intent that bore bad fruit
57  Became a Greek by ceding to the pastor;

55  L'altro che segue, con le leggi e meco,
56  sotto buona intenzion che fé mal frutto,
57  per cedere al pastor si fece greco:

58  Now knoweth he how all the ill deduced
59  From his good action is not harmful to him,
60  Although the world thereby may be destroyed.

58  ora conosce come il mal dedutto
59  dal suo bene operar non li è nocivo,
60  avvegna che sia 'l mondo indi distrutto.

61  And he, whom in the downward arc thou seest,
62  Guglielmo was, whom the same land deplores
63  That weepeth Charles and Frederick yet alive;

61  E quel che vedi ne l'arco declivo,
62  Guiglielmo fu, cui quella terra plora
63  che piagne Carlo e Federigo vivo:

64  Now knoweth he how heaven enamoured is
65  With a just king; and in the outward show
66  Of his effulgence he reveals it still.

64  ora conosce come s'innamora
65  lo ciel del giusto rege, e al sembiante
66  del suo fulgore il fa vedere ancora.

67  Who would believe, down in the errant world,
68  That e'er the Trojan Ripheus in this round
69  Could be the fifth one of the holy lights?

67  Chi crederebbe giù nel mondo errante
68  che Rifëo Troiano in questo tondo
69  fosse la quinta de le luci sante?

70  Now knoweth he enough of what the world
71  Has not the power to see of grace divine,
72  Although his sight may not discern the bottom."

70  Ora conosce assai di quel che 'l mondo
71  veder non può de la divina grazia,
72  ben che sua vista non discerna il fondo.”

73  Like as a lark that in the air expatiates,
74   First singing and then silent with content
75  Of the last sweetness that doth satisfy her,

73  Quale allodetta che 'n aere si spazia
74  prima cantando, e poi tace contenta
75  de l'ultima dolcezza che la sazia,

76  Such seemed to me the image of the imprint
77  Of the eternal pleasure, by whose will
78  Doth everything become the thing it is.

76  tal mi sembiò l'imago de la 'mprenta
77  de l'etterno piacere, al cui disio
78  ciascuna cosa qual ell' è diventa.

79  And notwithstanding to my doubt I was
80  As glass is to the colour that invests it,
81  To wait the time in silence it endured not,

79  E avvegna ch'io fossi al dubbiar mio
80  lì quasi vetro a lo color ch'el veste,
81  tempo aspettar tacendo non patio,

82  But forth from out my mouth, "What things are these?"
83  Extorted with the force of its own weight;
84  Whereat I saw great joy of coruscation.

82  ma de la bocca, “Che cose son queste?”
83  mi pinse con la forza del suo peso:
84  per ch'io di coruscar vidi gran feste.

85  Thereafterward with eye still more enkindled
86  The blessed standard made to me reply,
87  To keep me not in wonderment suspended:

85  Poi appresso, con l'occhio più acceso,
86  lo benedetto segno mi rispuose
87  per non tenermi in ammirar sospeso:

88  "I see that thou believest in these things
89  Because I say them, but thou seest not how;
90  So that, although believed in, they are hidden.

88  “Io veggio che tu credi queste cose
89  perch' io le dico, ma non vedi come;
90  si che, se son credute, sono ascose.

90  Thou doest as he doth who a thing by name
91  Well apprehendeth, but its quiddity
92  Cannot perceive, unless another show it.

90  Fai come quei che la cosa per nome
91 apprende ben, ma la sua quiditate
92  veder non può se altri non la prome.

94  'Regnum coelorum' suffereth violence
95  From fervent love, and from that living hope
96  That overcometh the Divine volition;

94  Regnum celorum vïolenza pate
95  da caldo amore e da viva speranza,
96  che vince la divina volontate:

97  Not in the guise that man o'ercometh man,
98  But conquers it because it will be conquered,
99  And conquered conquers by benignity.

97  non a guisa che l'omo a l'om sobranza,
98  ma vince lei perché vuole esser vinta,
99  e, vinta, vince con sua beninanza.

100  The first life of the eyebrow and the fifth
101  Cause thee astonishment, because with them
102  Thou seest the region of the angels painted.

100  La prima vita del ciglio e la quinta
101  ti fa maravigliar, perché ne vedi
102  la regïon de li angeli dipinta.

103  They passed not from their bodies, as thou thinkest,
104  Gentiles, but Christians in the steadfast faith
105  Of feet that were to suffer and had suffered.

103  D'i corpi suoi non uscir, come credi,
104  Gentili, ma Cristiani, in ferma fede
105  quel d'i passuri e quel d'i passi piedi.

106  For one from Hell, where no one e'er turns back
107  Unto good will, returned unto his bones,
108  And that of living hope was the reward,—

106  Ché l'una de lo 'nferno, u' non si riede
107  già mai a buon voler, tornò a l'ossa;
108  e ciò di viva spene fu mercede:

109  Of living hope, that placed its efficacy
110  In prayers to God made to resuscitate him,
111  So that 'twere possible to move his will.

109  di viva spene, che mise la possa
110  ne' prieghi fatti a Dio per suscitarla,
111 sì che potesse sua voglia esser mossa.

112  The glorious soul concerning which I speak,
113  Returning to the flesh, where brief its stay,
114  Believed in Him who had the power to aid it;

112  L'anima glorïosa onde si parla,
113  tornata ne la carne, in che fu poco,
114  credette in lui che potëa aiutarla;

115  And, in believing, kindled to such fire
116  Of genuine love, that at the second death
117  Worthy it was to come unto this joy.

115  e credendo s'accese in tanto foco
116  di vero amor, ch'a la morte seconda
117  fu degna di venire a questo gioco.

118  The other one, through grace, that from so deep
119  A fountain wells that never hath the eye
120  Of any creature reached its primal wave

118  L'altra, per grazia che da sì profonda
119  fontana stilla, che mai creatura
120  non pinse l'occhio infino a la prima onda,

121  Set all his love below on righteousness;
122  Wherefore from grace to grace did God unclose
123  His eye to our redemption yet to be,

121  tutto suo amor là giù pose a drittura:
122  per che, di grazia in grazia, Dio li aperse
123  l'occhio a la nostra redenzion futura;

124   Whence he believed therein, and suffered not
125  From that day forth the stench of paganism,
126  And he reproved therefor the folk perverse.

124  ond' ei credette in quella, e non sofferse
125  da indi il puzzo più del paganesmo;
126 e riprendiene le genti perverse.

127  Those Maidens three, whom at the right-hand wheel
128  Thou didst behold, were unto him for baptism
129  More than a thousand years before baptizing.

127  Quelle tre donne li fur per battesmo
128  che tu vedesti da la destra rota,
129  dinanzi al battezzar più d'un millesmo.

130  O thou predestination, how remote
131  Thy root is from the aspect of all those
132  Who the First Cause do not behold entire!

130  O predestinazion, quanto remota
131  è la radice tua da quelli aspetti
132  che la prima cagion non veggion tota!

133  And you, O mortals! hold yourselves restrained
134  In judging; for ourselves, who look on God,
135  We do not know as yet all the elect;

133  E voi, mortali, tenetevi stretti
134  a giudicar: ché noi, che Dio vedemo,
135  non conosciamo ancor tutti li eletti;

136  And sweet to us is such a deprivation,
137  Because our good in this good is made perfect,
138  That whatsoe'er God wills, we also will."

136  ed ènne dolce così fatto scemo,
137  perché il ben nostro in questo ben s'affina,
138  che quel che vole Iddio, e noi volemo.”

139  After this manner by that shape divine,
140  To make clear in me my short-sightedness,
141  Was given to me a pleasant medicine;

139  Così da quella imagine divina,
140  per farmi chiara la mia corta vista,
141  data mi fu soave medicina.

142  And as good singer a good lutanist
144  Accompanies with vibrations of the chords,
145  Whereby more pleasantness the song acquires,

142  E come a buon cantor buon citarista
143  fa seguitar lo guizzo de la corda,
144  in che più di piacer lo canto acquista,

145  So, while it spake, do I remember me
146  That I beheld both of those blessed lights,
147  Even as the winking of the eyes concords,

145  sì, mentre ch'e' parlò, sì mi ricorda
146  ch'io vidi le due luci benedette,
147  pur come batter d'occhi si concorda,

148  Moving unto the words their little flames.

148  con le parole mover le fiammette.

Canto XXI
The heaven of Saturn has two properties by which it may be compared to Astrology: one is the slowness of its movement through the 12 signs, for according to the writings of the astrologers, a time of more than 29 years is required for its revolution; the other is that it is high above all the other planets.  And these two properties are found in Astrology: for in completing its circle (that is to say, to master this science) a very great span of time passes, both because of its handmaids, which are more numerous than those of any of the above-mentioned sciences, and because of the experience required in it for making proper judgments.  Furthermore, it is far higher than all the others, since, as Aristotle says at the beginning of On the Soul, a science is high in nobility by virtue of the nobility of its subject and by virtue of its certainty; and this one, more than any of those mentioned above, is high and noble because of its high and noble subject, which regards the movement of the heaven, and high and noble because of its certainty, which is flawless, as coming from a most perfect and regular principle.  And if anyone believes that there is a flaw in it, it does not pertain to the science, but as Ptolemy says, it results from our negligence, and so must be attributed to that.

Convivio, Chapter 13 

A canto of contemplation, which is something different than meditation, in that contemplation directs the subjective self to an unfathomable object — that object to Dante, which is most unfathomable, is God.  Suppose there are two directions in which one might turn one's mind, desires, and activities.  In one direction the mind and heart pursue a temporal object to satiate a temporal aspiration for the subjective temporal self.  These objects might be such things sensual enjoyment, power, prestige, admiration, expertise, skill, and so forth.  Beauty too can fall into this category, with the caveat that what we're talking about in the sensory temporal world is a type of beauty subject to the temporal laws of accident, blooming and decay.  The other direction in which one might turn one's mind is towards that which is infinite, is not subject to temporal process, and is always opening horizons steeped with a second kind of more dangerous beauty, the kind of beauty of perpetual, unattainable allure, the kind of contemplation which swallows up the contemplative, and may very well immolate his temporal self in an atemporal vision.  This kind of contemplation can fix one in an incommunicable fanaticism, set one on a course of martyrdom and world denial, or, if the contemplative remains steadfast and understands the limitation that there can be no possible temporal fulfillment of his quest, then, one becomes like Peter Damian and his cohorts here, eaten away by an intense — and for mortals — an intolerable joy.  Those in this 7th heaven, the heaven of Saturn, the heaven of contemplation on the highest and noblest of things, have become so like the object of their contemplation that their own subjectivity is consumed.  We know this here, because Peter Damian corrects Dante by telling him that it was not a personal affection for Dante which impelled his actions, but rather an impulse for the Infinite.  From the point of view of a temporal human, the spirits in the this sphere have become, in the slow maturation process of Saturn's slowly completed orbit, inhuman presences, their songs inaudible, their bodies bolts of lightning.

Ecstasy is a shock to the system, and this is especially so for those who attain it too suddenly without some long tempering process wherein its intensities can be absorbed piecemeal, and not brought on in a rush, like a surge of electricity in a circuit incapable of handling its load.  This great sphere of Saturn is a great buffering zone against any such sudden shock.  Saturn is slow, deliberate, the father of long contemplations, and disciplined processes, which dilute the hallucinogens of its soul-medicinals into small acceptable doses.  We may think we all long for bliss, and that all our actions, thoughts, and emotions are devoted to achieving that end, but anyone who has experienced even the smallest portion of this expansive condition, will know with what alacrity we retreat from its realization.  Which is why, I would guess, that less hardy souls are content to wallow interminably in the self-tortures of Hell in preference to the self-abnegating joys of heaven, whose high harmonies and celestial lights, as this canto makes clear, would quickly annihilate the uninitiated.  I cannot think of a canto in which the aspirant Dante is more mature in spirit, or one in which he is more childlike in his acceptance.  This is illustrated in his readiness to forego what for him has been his most supreme joy, and his one sure validation of the truth — the beautiful visage of Beatrice, polestar of his love and life, a joy which for the first time here he forgoes for a higher yet much more subtle and more difficult to attain condition, that is: obedience.

I have pondered over this canto for many days, having read and mentally rehearsed what I wanted to say about it.  I have taken long walks trying to arrange my thoughts about it.  I have studied the Western commentary tradition, and read some of Peter Damian's letters.  I have even discovered that he wrote about the stages of the ladder of contemplation, and I have discovered how the commentators have made the obvious connection between the ladder we see here and Jacob's ladder in the Bible.  I have read too what an Eastern commentator steeped in meditative practice had to say about what Doctor Lee Sannella calls the physio-kundalini process, and how this ladder is equated with the spine, and how this process opens the cerebrospinal centers of the chakras, which leads to the ecstatic state shown here.  But every time I think I am ready to tackle these notes, my mind and emotions are captured by the process this canto expresses, and I am carried away on my own flights to infinity.  I have been slowed to the speed of the throne of Saturn, the father of time infecting me with his timelessness.  Dante is up to his old tricks here, his bird metaphors of how jackdaws, rise, wheel, flock, some departing on their own, some returning to their perches, and we recall the other times he has used birds as a way to express processes of the spirit.  Peter's denunciation of the corruption of church officials is also familiar, and the rich fur acting as the skin which covers the two beasts of horse and man is another in a long line of brilliant depictions, which succinctly use a powerful image to brand the readers mind with an indelible impression.  Even the amazing move from undetectable song which seems but a silence to the aspirant to a sound so loud at the conclusion of the canto that it also exceeds the capacity of the aspirant's hearing to absorb it — all of this is wrought clearly and exquisitely in Dante's usual, incomparable poetic fashion.  But for me, the deeper effect of this canto is that it actually has seemed to facilitate the transference of the ecstatic state from Peter Damian, through Dante and his remarkable verse, to a brain state, which for me, the reader, is akin to those elsewhere expressed as kundalini-arousing phenomenon.  Here Dante takes his art to a new level.  The commentator-tradition does not mention this transference, but for some readers no doubt a miraculous thing is beginning to occur here, which is perfectly analogous to the situation described in this canto.  By contemplating the words here, we ourselves do not just experience a description of the psychical-physiological state of the spirits in this canto, but find ourselves entrained, spellbound, to the slowly unwinding swiftly transcending condition that is not only expressed by the verse, but which is embodied in it.  Yes, creature can never be more than Creator, but by contemplating the Creator's creation, the creature begins to take on more and more of the Creator's  ecstatic life and love.  And here, just as we rise to the last, and seventh Heaven, we succumb to something new in the process of reading, and begin to experience what the aspirant inside the poem is experiencing.  Our momentum up to now has been an acceleration of ground speed, but we are changing now to air speed, we are beginning the flight from our temporal to our atemporal selves.  I know there are more canti left to read, a further ascent in store for us, but I am content to be here.  And if the poem ended with this Big Bang of the last verses of this canto, I feel I could happily live indefinitely in the stunning aftershock of this primal sound.     


1  Already on my Lady's face mine eyes
2  Again were fastened, and with these my mind,
3  And from all other purpose was withdrawn;

1  Già eran li occhi miei rifissi al volto
2  de la mia donna, e l'animo con essi,
3  e da ogne altro intento s'era tolto.

4  And she smiled not; but "If I were to smile,"
5  She unto me began, "thou wouldst become
6  Like Semele, when she was turned to ashes.

4  E quella non ridea; ma “S'io ridessi,”
5  mi cominciò, “tu ti faresti quale
6  fu Semelè quando di cener fessi:

7  Because my beauty, that along the stairs
8  Of the eternal palace more enkindles,
9  As thou hast seen, the farther we ascend,

7  ché la bellezza mia, che per le scale
8  de l'etterno palazzo più s'accende,
9  com' hai veduto, quanto più si sale,

10  If it were tempered not, is so resplendent
11  That all thy mortal power in its effulgence
12  Would seem a leaflet that the thunder crushes.

10  se non si temperasse, tanto splende,
11  che 'l tuo mortal podere, al suo fulgore,
12  sarebbe fronda che trono scoscende.

13  We are uplifted to the seventh splendour,
14  That underneath the burning Lion's breast
15  Now radiates downward mingled with his power.

13  Noi sem levati al settimo splendore,
14  che sotto 'l petto del Leone ardente
15  raggia mo misto giù del suo valore.

16  Fix in direction of thine eyes the mind,
17  And make of them a mirror for the figure
18  That in this mirror shall appear to thee."

16  Ficca di retro a li occhi tuoi la mente,
17  e fa di quelli specchi a la figura
18  che 'n questo specchio ti sarà parvente.”

19  He who could know what was the pasturage
20  My sight had in that blessed countenance,
21  When I transferred me to another care,

19  Qual savesse qual era la pastura
20  del viso mio ne l'aspetto beato
21  quand' io mi trasmutai ad altra cura,

22  Would recognize how grateful was to me
23  Obedience unto my celestial escort,
24  By counterpoising one side with the other.

22  conoscerebbe quanto m'era a grato
23  ubidire a la mia celeste scorta,
24  contrapesando l'un con l'altro lato.

25  Within the crystal which, around the world
26  Revolving, bears the name of its dear leader,
27  Under whom every wickedness lay dead,

25  Dentro al cristallo che 'l vocabol porta,
26  cerchiando il mondo, del suo caro duce
27  sotto cui giacque ogne malizia morta,

28  Coloured like gold, on which the sunshine gleams,
29  A stairway I beheld to such a height
30  Uplifted, that mine eye pursued it not.

28  di color d'oro in che raggio traluce
29  vid' io uno scaleo eretto in suso
30  tanto, che nol seguiva la mia luce.

31  Likewise beheld I down the steps descending
32  So many splendours, that I thought each light
33  That in the heaven appears was there diffused.

31  Vidi anche per li gradi scender giuso
32  tanti splendor, ch'io pensai ch'ogne lume
33  che par nel ciel, quindi fosse diffuso.

34  And as accordant with their natural custom
35  The rooks together at the break of day
36  Bestir themselves to warm their feathers cold;

34  E come, per lo natural costume,
35  le pole insieme, al cominciar del giorno,
36  si movono a scaldar le fredde piume;

37  Then some of them fly off without return,
38  Others come back to where they started from,
39  And others, wheeling round, still keep at home;

37  poi altre vanno via sanza ritorno,
38  altre rivolgon sé onde son mosse,
39  e altre roteando fan soggiorno;

40  Such fashion it appeared to me was there
41  Within the sparkling that together came,
42  As soon as on a certain step it struck,

40  tal modo parve me che quivi fosse
41  in quello sfavillar che 'nsieme venne,
42  sì come in certo grado si percosse.

43  And that which nearest unto us remained
44  Became so clear, that in my thought I said,
45  "Well I perceive the love thou showest me;

43  E quel che presso più ci si ritenne,
44  si fé sì chiaro, ch'io dicea pensando:
45  “Io veggio ben l'amor che tu m'accenne.

46  But she, from whom I wait the how and when
47  Of speech and silence, standeth still; whence I
48  Against desire do well if I ask not."

46  Ma quella ond' io aspetto il come e 'l quando
47  del dire e del tacer, si sta; ond' io,
48  contra 'l disio, fo ben ch'io non dimando.”

49  She thereupon, who saw my silentness
50  In the sight of Him who seeth everything,
51  Said unto me, "Let loose thy warm desire."

49  Per ch'ella, che vedëa il tacer mio
50  nel veder di colui che tutto vede,
51  mi disse: “Solvi il tuo caldo disio.”

52  And I began: "No merit of my own
53  Renders me worthy of response from thee;
54  But for her sake who granteth me the asking,

52  E io incominciai: “La mia mercede
53  non mi fa degno de la tua risposta;
54  ma per colei che 'l chieder mi concede,

55  Thou blessed life that dost remain concealed
56  In thy beatitude, make known to me
57  The cause which draweth thee so near my side;

55  vita beata che ti stai nascosta
56  dentro a la tua letizia, fammi nota
57  la cagion che sì presso mi t'ha posta;

58  And tell me why is silent in this wheel
59  The dulcet symphony of Paradise,
60  That through the rest below sounds so devoutly."

58  e dì perché si tace in questa rota
59  la dolce sinfonia di paradiso,
60  che giù per l'altre suona sì divota.”

61  "Thou hast thy hearing mortal as thy sight,"
62  It answer made to me; "they sing not here,
63  For the same cause that Beatrice has not smiled.

61  “Tu hai l'udir mortal sì come il viso,”
62   rispuose a me; “onde qui non si canta
63  per quel che Bëatrice non ha riso.

64  Thus far adown the holy stairway's steps
65  Have I descended but to give thee welcome
66  With words, and with the light that mantles me;

64  Giù per li gradi de la scala santa
65  discesi tanto sol per farti festa
66  col dire e con la luce che mi ammanta;

67  Nor did more love cause me to be more ready,
68  For love as much and more up there is burning,
69  As doth the flaming manifest to thee.

67  né più amor mi fece esser più presta,
68  ché più e tanto amor quinci sù ferve,
69  sì come il fiammeggiar ti manifesta.

70  But the high charity, that makes us servants
71  Prompt to the counsel which controls the world,
72  Allotteth here, even as thou dost observe."

70  Ma l'alta carità, che ci fa serve
71  pronte al consiglio che 'l mondo governa,
72  sorteggia qui sì come tu osserve.”

73  "I see full well," said I, "O sacred lamp!
74  How love unfettered in this court sufficeth
75  To follow the eternal Providence;

73  “Io veggio ben,” diss' io, “sacra lucerna,
74  come libero amore in questa corte
75  basta a seguir la provedenza etterna;

76  But this is what seems hard for me to see,
77  Wherefore predestinate wast thou alone
78  Unto this office from among thy consorts."

76  ma questo è quel ch'a cerner mi par forte,
77  perché predestinata fosti sola
78  a questo officio tra le tue consorte.”

79  No sooner had I come to the last word,
80  Than of its middle made the light a centre,
81  Whirling itself about like a swift millstone.

79  Né venni prima a l'ultima parola,
80  che del suo mezzo fece il lume centro,
81  girando sé come veloce mola;

82  When answer made the love that was therein:
83  "On me directed is a light divine,
84  Piercing through this in which I am embosomed,

82  poi rispuose l'amor che v'era dentro:
83 “Luce divina sopra me s'appunta,
84   penetrando per questa in ch'io m'inventro,

85  Of which the virtue with my sight conjoined
86  Lifts me above myself so far, I see
87  The supreme essence from which this is drawn.

85  la cui virtù, col mio veder congiunta,
86  mi leva sopra me tanto, ch'i' veggio
87  la somma essenza de la quale è munta.

88  Hence comes the joyfulness with which I flame,
89  For to my sight, as far as it is clear,
90  The clearness of the flame I equal make.

88  Quinci vien l'allegrezza ond' io fiammeggio;
89  per ch'a la vista mia, quant' ella è chiara,
90  la chiarità de la fiamma pareggio.

91  But that soul in the heaven which is most pure,
92  That seraph which his eye on God most fixes,
93  Could this demand of thine not satisfy;

91  Ma quell' alma nel ciel che più si schiara,
92  quel serafin che 'n Dio più l'occhio ha fisso,
93  a la dimanda tua non satisfara, 

94  Because so deeply sinks in the abyss
95  Of the eternal statute what thou askest,
96  From all created sight it is cut off.

94  però che sì s'innoltra ne lo abisso
95  de l'etterno statuto quel che chiedi,
96  che da ogne creata vista è scisso.

97  And to the mortal world, when thou returnest,
98  This carry back, that it may not presume
99  Longer tow'rd such a goal to move its feet.

97  E al mondo mortal, quando tu riedi,
98  questo rapporta, sì che non presumma
99  a tanto segno più mover li piedi.

100  The mind, that shineth here, on earth doth smoke;
101  From this observe how can it do below
102  That which it cannot though the heaven assume it?"

100  La mente, che qui luce, in terra fumma;
101  onde riguarda come può là giùe
102  quel che non pote perché 'l ciel l'assumma.”

103  Such limit did its words prescribe to me,
104  The question I relinquished, and restricted
105  Myself to ask it humbly who it was.

103  Sì mi prescrisser le parole sue,
104  ch'io lasciai la quistione e mi ritrassi
105  a dimandarla umilmente chi fue.

106  "Between two shores of Italy rise cliffs,
107  And not far distant from thy native place,
108  So high, the thunders far below them sound,

106  “Tra ' due liti d'Italia surgon sassi,
107  e non molto distanti a la tua patria,
108  tanto che ' troni assai suonan più bassi,

109  And form a ridge that Catria is called,
110  'Neath which is consecrate a hermitage
111  Wont to be dedicate to worship only."

109  e fanno un gibbo che si chiama Catria,
110  di sotto al quale è consecrato un ermo,
111  che suole esser disposto a sola latria.”

112  Thus unto me the third speech recommenced,
113  And then, continuing, it said: "Therein
114  Unto God's service I became so steadfast,

112  Così ricominciommi il terzo sermo;
113  e poi, continüando, disse: “Quivi
114  al servigio di Dio mi fe' sì fermo,

115  That feeding only on the juice of olives
116  Lightly I passed away the heats and frosts,
117  Contented in my thoughts contemplative.

115  che pur con cibi di liquor d'ulivi
116  lievemente passava caldi e geli,
117  contento ne' pensier contemplativi.

118  That cloister used to render to these heavens
119  Abundantly, and now is empty grown,
110  So that perforce it soon must be revealed.

118  Render solea quel chiostro a questi cieli
119  fertilemente; e ora è fatto vano,
120  sì che tosto convien che si riveli.

121  I in that place was Peter Damiano;
122  And Peter the Sinner was I in the house
123  Of Our Lady on the Adriatic shore.

121  In quel loco fu' io Pietro Damiano,
122  e Pietro Peccator fu' ne la casa
123  di Nostra Donna in sul lito adriano.

124  Little of mortal life remained to me,
125  When I was called and dragged forth to the hat
126  Which shifteth evermore from bad to worse.

124  Poca vita mortal m'era rimasa,
125  quando fui chiesto e tratto a quel cappello,
126  che pur di male in peggio si travasa.

127  Came Cephas, and the mighty Vessel came
128  Of the Holy Spirit, meagre and barefooted,
129  Taking the food of any hostelry.

127  Venne Cefàs e venne il gran vasello
128  de lo Spirito Santo, magri e scalzi,
129  prendendo il cibo da qualunque ostello.

130  Now some one to support them on each side
131  The modern shepherds need, and some to lead them,
132  So heavy are they, and to hold their trains.

130  Or voglion quinci e quindi chi rincalzi
131  li moderni pastori e chi li meni,
132  tanto son gravi, e chi di rietro li alzi.

133  They cover up their palfreys with their cloaks,
134  So that two beasts go underneath one skin;
135  O Patience, that dost tolerate so much!"

133  Cuopron d'i manti loro i palafreni,
134  sì che due bestie van sott' una pelle:
135  oh pazïenza che tanto sostieni!”

136  At this voice saw I many little flames
137  From step to step descending and revolving,
138  And every revolution made them fairer.

136  A questa voce vid' io più fiammelle
137  di grado in grado scendere e girarsi,
138  e ogne giro le facea più belle.

139  Round about this one came they and stood still,
140  And a cry uttered of so loud a sound,
141  It here could find no parallel, nor I

139  Dintorno a questa vennero e fermarsi,
140  e fero un grido di sì alto suono,
141  che non potrebbe qui assomigliarsi;

142  Distinguished it, the thunder so o'ercame me.

142 né io lo 'ntesi, sì mi vinse il tuono.

Canto XXII
We who have taken on a temporal body are so ill-equipped to accept that we are the constant recipients of unconditional love.  Thus we must always be channeling that love which flows constantly towards us and through us, as if through the sieve of our own questionings and our own sense of justice.  Here in the Heaven of Saturn, the aspirant, Dante, the poet Dante — and the reader too — all, as if we were children clinging to our mother, are finding out how much we apply limits to our own acceptance of grace, how much we want the emissaries of Heaven — in this case, Saint Benedict — to converse with us through the medium of our own need for vengeance and retribution.  Vengeance against what?  Retribution against who?  I think against those good intentions that we all start out with, and yet through our weakness and limited mortal perceptions, like those church prelates denounced here, we not only fall far short of the goal of redemption, we betray ourselves through our own corruption.  A balance must, we mortals feel, be restored, through our own mortal need for punishment.  Beatrice, at the beginning of this canto exhorts her ward to remember that he is in heaven, that we are in heaven, but is that even possible when any kind of rancor against ourselves, or by psychological projection, against others, continues to eat away at our aspirations to experience joy?  How could the joy that Benedict feels, whirled as he is through the composite community of his blessed sibling souls in this last sphere of Heaven, have any need of vengeance in his experience of profound grace?  Does Saint Benedict speak the way he does in this canto because this expression of mortal justice is the only language that will satisfy Dante's, and our, sense that God must be just, and that the whole previous rigmarole of passing through the baptism of the River Lethe, did not cleanse us of the remembrance of sin at all.  We merely forgot our own sins, not the sins of others, and especially not the sins of those who have violated our need to see their sins purged through pain and punishment.  That need is the quintessential brand of our mortality, our morality, it is the scar which is the mark of Cain, that scar which differentiates our sense of the divine from Divinity itself.  If we saw and felt God's unconditional love, our whole sense of self would be immolated, and nothing would remain but our communal joy in the single community of those immersed in God's love.  What does the poem actually say here?  And is this marvelous verse confronting us with the supreme challenge of questioning its own aesthetic precepts?  Questions abound and proliferate.  Can we even accept grace if it does not come with our own limited sense of justice?  Can the rule of Saint Benedict be followed even to the point of accepting its most serene existence in the nest of vipers which is the temporal world?  What does unconditional mean if it's mystery is obscured by our own illnesses, hurts, and disappointments?  We see in this canto that the Inferno's theme of retribution has been brought from the depths of Hell to infect us, even here, in the Highest of the High Heavens.  However far we have come through all the consciousness states of the Inferno, Purgatory, and Paradise, our journey has been but an inch compared to how far we still must travel to experience face to face this thing called God. The point of transition would be hopelessly far off, where it not for Divine grace, depicted here as an instantaneity, which like a whirlwind, sucks the seemingly individual souls of the contemplatives into a unified vortex of ascension.  In this canto, Saint Benedict does not so much give us his joy as he gives us a mirror in which we see the reflection of that sense of injustice which prevents us from experiencing his joy.  How incongruent it is that Dante shows us such a dazzle of unearthly speed and brilliance, community and connection, but only to carry a message of vengeance.  If that indeed is what he is doing, and not illustrating how in an instant, all that need for vengeance is whirled away, leaving us breathless in the stillness of the Empyrion.  The verse shows that there is a split here between body and soul, a split, which in Christianity, is only healed through the crucifixion and resurrection of Jesus' unjustly tortured body redeemed through Christ's transfiguration.  This, and the doctrine of forgiveness, perhaps constitute the uniqueness of Christianity.  The Book of Revelations with its trumpet call to damnation for the lost simultaneously being that of the clarion for the bodily redemption of the saved seems a to me to be a false note in the harmonies of these spheres.  How can this cloven fiction be the culmination of the gospels?  And what in fact is the source of that peace which the Benedictines sought in their contemplations?  Contemplations of what?  And what could have possibly been lost when Benedict passed from his sanctuary into world, and which indeed was the true contemplation?  The sequestered?  Or the corruption of the trial of the world?  The retribution that the indignant virtuous are forever seeking is always in the future, even the near future, but it never seems to come.  The unjust seem free to perpetually perpetuate their injustices, and they never quite arrive at that point where, as far off as the last judgement, their perfidies will be expunged.  This canto seems a kind of launching pad, wherein the very sense of injustice is but the rocket fuel which must be burned away if we are to spurt beyond the feeling that something is terribly wrong with the universe, terribly wrong with God, as long as this division exists wherein we feel this is Good, this Evil, this mortality and death, this the everlasting Divine.  The trope here is that there is a point in time which negates time, and transforms the temporal to the eternal, an energy in the spine of the temporal body which whirls the mortal into immortality.

This canto also has a retrospective quality, Dante is exhorted to look back on how far he has come, and he looks back onto the stars of his nativity.  Perhaps we all have a destiny prefigured in the stars, if so, this twinness, this binocular vision, its oscillations between good and evil, the just and the unjust, between irony and sincerity, reason and heart, chance and order, and so forth, is Dante's destiny.  But even this destiny through a chrysalis — as Beatrice implies here — must be shed in preparation for the ultimate apotheosis.  As long as there is a Self to measure, to judge, to question, the desire of Divine communion is just that: a desire, not a fulfillment.  Even the fabulous spectacles of heaven remain outside of us, something seen, described, but still over there, separate from us.  For us to be this blessedness, and close the gap to zero, something else must happen.  What that something might be, remains not only unknown, but lies in the fact that we have not yet accepted that the ultimate plenum/vacuum/God is perpetually unknowable, and this is exactly the source of our fulfillment.  It seems that we must still ask the two-year-old's question "Why?", not knowing that we do not so much desire to be given the answer as we desire to be connected to that mysterious source through our willingness to engage with our limited perceptions, the unlimited Divine.

Epilog (Wikipedia Summation of the Rule of Saint Benedict) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rule_of_Saint_Benedict

The Rule opens with a hortatory preface, drawing on the Admonitio ad filium spiritualem,[8] in which Saint Benedict sets forth the main principles of the religious life, viz.: the renunciation of one's own will and arming oneself "with the strong and noble weapons of obedience" under the banner of "the true King, Christ the Lord" (Prol. 3). He proposes to establish a "school for the Lord's service" (Prol. 45) in which the "way to salvation" (Prol. 48) shall be taught, so that by persevering in the monastery till death his disciples may "through patience share in the passion of Christ that [they] may deserve also to share in his Kingdom" (Prol. 50, passionibus Christi per patientiam participemur, ut et regno eius mereamur esse consortes; note: Latin passionibus and patientiam have the same root, cf. Fry, RB 1980, p. 167).[9]
•	Chapter 1 defines four kinds of monk:
1.	Cenobites, those "in a monastery, where they serve under a rule and an abbot".
2.	Anchorites, or hermits, who, after long successful training in a monastery, are now coping single-handedly, with only God for their help.
Regula, 1495
3.	Sarabaites, living by twos and threes together or even alone, with no experience, rule and superior, and thus a law unto themselves.[9]
4.	Gyrovagues, wandering from one monastery to another, slaves to their own wills and appetites.[9]
 
Saint Benedict delivering his rule to the monks of his order, Monastery of St. Gilles, Nimes, France, 1129
•	Chapter 2 describes the necessary qualifications of an abbot, forbids the abbot to make distinctions between persons in the monastery except for particular merit, and warns him he will be answerable for the salvation of the souls in his care.[9]
•	Chapter 3 ordains the calling of the brothers to council upon all affairs of importance to the community.[9]
•	Chapter 4 lists 73 "tools for good work", "tools of the spiritual craft" for the "workshop" that is "the enclosure of the monastery and the stability in the community". These are essentially the duties of every Christian and are mainly Scriptural either in letter or in spirit.[9]
•	Chapter 5 prescribes prompt, ungrudging, and absolute obedience to the superior in all things lawful,[9] "unhesitating obedience" being called the first degree, or step, of humility.
•	Chapter 6 recommends moderation in the use of speech, but does not enjoin strict silence, nor prohibit profitable or necessary conversation.[9]
•	Chapter 7 divides humility into twelve degrees, or steps in the ladder that leads to heaven:[9](1) Fear God; (2) Subordinate one's will to the will of God; (3) Be obedient to one's superior; (4) Be patient amid hardships; (5) Confess one's sins; (6) Accept the meanest of tasks, and hold oneself as a "worthless workman"; (7) Consider oneself "inferior to all"; (8) Follow examples set by superiors; (9) Do not speak until spoken to; (10) Do not readily laugh; (11) Speak simply and modestly; and (12) Express one's inward humility through bodily posture.
•	Chapters 8–19 regulate the Divine Office, the Godly work to which "nothing is to be preferred", namely the eight canonical hours. Detailed arrangements are made for the number of Psalms, etc., to be recited in winter and summer, on Sundays, weekdays, Holy Days, and at other times.[9]
•	Chapter 19 emphasizes the reverence owed to the omnipresent God.[9]
•	Chapter 20 directs that prayer be made with heartfelt compunction rather than many words.[9] It should be prolonged only under the inspiration of divine grace, and in community always kept short and terminated at a sign from the superior.
•	Chapter 21 regulates the appointment of a Dean over every ten monks.[9]
•	Chapter 22 regulates the dormitory. Each monk is to have a separate bed and is to sleep in his habit, so as to be ready to rise without delay [for early Vigils]; a light shall burn in the dormitory throughout the night.[9]
•	Chapters 23–29 specify a graduated scale of punishments for contumacy (refusal to obey authority), disobedience, pride, and other grave faults: first, private admonition; next, public reproof; then separation from the brothers at meals and elsewhere;[9] and finally excommunication (or in the case of those lacking understanding of what this means, corporal punishment instead).
•	Chapter 30 directs that a wayward brother who has left the monastery must be received again, if he promises to make amends; but if he leaves again, and again, after his third departure all return is finally barred.[9]
•	Chapters 31 & 32 order the appointment of officials to take charge of the goods of the monastery.[9]
•	Chapter 33 forbids the private possession of anything without the leave of the abbot, who is, however, bound to supply all necessities.[9]
•	Chapter 34 prescribes a just distribution of such things.[9]
•	Chapter 35 arranges for the service in the kitchen by all monks in turn.[9]
•	Chapters 36 & 37 address care of the sick, the old, and the young. They are to have certain dispensations from the strict Rule, chiefly in the matter of food.[9]
•	Chapter 38 prescribes reading aloud during meals, which duty is to be performed by those who can do so with edification to the rest. Signs are to be used for whatever may be wanted at meals, so that no voice interrupts the reading. The reader eats with the servers after the rest have finished, but he is allowed a little food beforehand in order to lessen the fatigue of reading.[9]
•	Chapters 39 & 40 regulate the quantity and quality of the food. Two meals a day are allowed, with two cooked dishes at each. Each monk is allowed a pound of bread and a hemina (about a quarter litre) of wine. The flesh of four-footed animals is prohibited except for the sick and the weak.[9]
•	Chapter 41 prescribes the hours of the meals, which vary with the time of year.[9]
•	Chapter 42 enjoins the reading of an edifying book in the evening, and orders strict silence after Compline.[9]
•	Chapters 43–46 define penalties for minor faults, such as coming late to prayer or meals.[9]
•	Chapter 47 requires the abbot to call the brothers to the "work of God" (Opus Dei) in choir, and to appoint chanters and readers.[9]
•	Chapter 48 emphasizes the importance of daily manual labour appropriate to the ability of the monk. The duration of labour varies with the season but is never less than five hours a day.[9]
•	Chapter 49 recommends some voluntary self-denial for Lent, with the abbot's sanction.[9]
•	Chapters 50 & 51 contain rules for monks working in the fields or travelling. They are directed to join in spirit, as far as possible, with their brothers in the monastery at the regular hours of prayers.[9]
•	Chapter 52 commands that the oratory be used for purposes of devotion only.[9]
•	Chapter 53 deals with hospitality. Guests are to be met with due courtesy by the abbot or his deputy; during their stay they are to be under the special protection of an appointed monk; they are not to associate with the rest of the community except by special permission.[9]
•	Chapter 54 forbids the monks to receive letters or gifts without the abbot's leave.[9]
•	Chapter 55 says clothing is to be adequate and suited to the climate and locality, at the discretion of the abbot. It must be as plain and cheap as is consistent with due economy. Each monk is to have a change of clothes to allow for washing, and when travelling is to have clothes of better quality. Old clothes are to be given to the poor.[9]
•	Chapter 56 directs the abbot to eat with the guests.[9]
•	Chapter 57 enjoins humility on the craftsmen of the monastery, and if their work is for sale, it shall be rather below than above the current trade price.[9]
•	Chapter 58 lays down rules for the admission of new members, which is not to be made too easy. The postulant first spends a short time as a guest; then he is admitted to the novitiate where his vocation is severely tested; during this time he is always free to leave. If after twelve months' probation he perseveres, he may promise before the whole community stabilitate sua et conversatione morum suorum et oboedientia – "stability, conversion of manners, and obedience". With this vow he binds himself for life to the monastery of his profession.[9]
•	Chapter 59 allows the admission of boys to the monastery under certain conditions.[9]
•	Chapter 60 regulates the position of priests who join the community. They are to set an example of humility, and can only exercise their priestly functions by permission of the abbot.[9]
•	Chapter 61 provides for the reception of strange monks as guests, and for their admission to the community.[9]
•	Chapter 62 deals with the ordination of priests from within the monastic community.
•	Chapter 63 lays down that precedence in the community shall be determined by the date of admission, merit of life, or the appointment of the abbot.[9]
•	Chapter 64 orders that the abbot be elected by his monks, and that he be chosen for his charity, zeal, and discretion.[9]
•	Chapter 65 allows the appointment of a provost, or prior, but warns that he is to be entirely subject to the abbot and may be admonished, deposed, or expelled for misconduct.
•	Chapter 66 appoints a porter, and recommends that each monastery be self-contained and avoid intercourse with the outer world.[9]
•	Chapter 67 instructs monks how to behave on a journey.[9]
•	Chapter 68 orders that all cheerfully try to do whatever is commanded, however hard it may seem.[9]
•	Chapter 69 forbids the monks from defending one another.[9]
•	Chapter 70 prohibits them from striking one another.[9]
•	Chapter 71 encourages the brothers to be obedient not only to the abbot and his officials, but also to one another.[9]
•	Chapter 72 briefly exhorts the monks to zeal and fraternal charity.[9]
•	Chapter 73 is an epilogue; it declares that the Rule is not offered as an ideal of perfection, but merely as a means towards godliness, intended chiefly for beginners in the spiritual life.[9]
 

1  Oppressed with stupor, I unto my guide
2  Turned like a little child who always runs
3  For refuge there where he confideth most;

1  Oppresso di stupore, a la mia guida
2  mi volsi, come parvol che ricorre .
3  sempre colà dove più si confida;

4  And she, even as a mother who straightway
5  Gives comfort to her pale and breathless boy
6  With voice whose wont it is to reassure him,

4  e quella, come madre che soccorre
5  sùbito al figlio palido e anelo
6  con la sua voce, che 'l suol ben disporre,

7  Said to me: "Knowest thou not thou art in heaven,
8  And knowest thou not that heaven is holy all
9  And what is done here cometh from good zeal?

7  mi disse: “Non sai tu che tu se' in cielo?
8  e non sai tu che 'l cielo è tutto santo,
9  e ciò che ci si fa vien da buon zelo?

10  After what wise the singing would have changed thee
11  And I by smiling, thou canst now imagine,
12  Since that the cry has startled thee so much,

10  Come t'avrebbe trasmutato il canto,
11  e io ridendo, mo pensar lo puoi,
12  poscia che 'l grido t'ha mosso cotanto;

13  In which if thou hadst understood its prayers
14  Already would be known to thee the vengeance
15  Which thou shalt look upon before thou diest.

13  nel qual, se 'nteso avessi i prieghi suoi,
14  già ti sarebbe nota la vendetta
15  che tu vedrai innanzi che tu muoi.

16  The sword above here smiteth not in haste
17  Nor tardily, howe'er it seem to him
18  Who fearing or desiring waits for it.

16  La spada di qua sù non taglia in fretta
17  né tardo, ma' ch'al parer di colui
18  che disïando o temendo l'aspetta.

19  But turn thee round towards the others now,
20  For very illustrious spirits shalt thou see,
21  If thou thy sight directest as I say."

19  Ma rivolgiti omai inverso altrui;
20  ch'assai illustri spiriti vedrai,
21  se com' io dico l'aspetto redui.”

22  As it seemed good to her mine eyes I turned,
23  And saw a hundred spherules that together
24  With mutual rays each other more embellished.

22  Come a lei piacque, li occhi ritornai,
23  e vidi cento sperule che 'nsieme
24  più s'abbellivan con mutüi rai.

25  I stood as one who in himself represses
26  The point of his desire, and ventures not
27  To question, he so feareth the too much.

25  Io stava come quei che 'n sé repreme
26  la punta del disio, e non s'attenta
27  di domandar, sì del troppo si teme;

28  And now the largest and most luculent
29  Among those pearls came forward, that it might
30  Make my desire concerning it content.

28  e la maggiore e la più luculenta
29  di quelle margherite innanzi fessi,
30  per far di sé la mia voglia contenta.

31  Within it then I heard: "If thou couldst see
32  Even as myself the charity that burns
33  Among us, thy conceits would be expressed;

31  Poi dentro a lei udi': “Se tu vedessi
32  com' io la carità che tra noi arde,
33  li tuoi concetti sarebbero espressi.

34  But, that by waiting thou mayst not come late
35  To the high end, I will make answer even
36  Unto the thought of which thou art so chary.

34  Ma perché tu, aspettando, non tarde
35  a l'alto fine, io ti farò risposta
36  pur al pensier, da che sì ti riguarde.

37  That mountain on whose slope Cassino stands
38  Was frequented of old upon its summit
39  By a deluded folk and ill-disposed;

37  Quel monte a cui Cassino è ne la costa
38  fu frequentato già in su la cima
39  da la gente ingannata e mal disposta;

40  And I am he who first up thither bore
41  The name of Him who brought upon the earth
42  The truth that so much sublimateth us.

40  e quel son io che sù vi portai prima
41  lo nome di colui che 'n terra addusse
42  la verità che tanto ci soblima;

43  And such abundant grace upon me shone
44  That all the neighbouring towns I drew away
45  From the impious worship that seduced the world.

43  e tanta grazia sopra me relusse,
44  ch'io ritrassi le ville circunstanti
45  da l'empio cólto che 'l mondo sedusse. 

46  These other fires, each one of them, were men
47  Contemplative, enkindled by that heat
48  Which maketh holy flowers and fruits spring up.

46  Questi altri fuochi tutti contemplanti
47  uomini fuoro, accesi di quel caldo
48  che fa nascere i fiori e ' frutti santi.

49  Here is Macarius, here is Romualdus,
50  Here are my brethren, who within the cloisters
51  Their footsteps stayed and kept a steadfast heart."

49  Qui è Maccario, qui è Romoaldo,
50  qui son li frati miei che dentro ai chiostri
51  fermar li piedi e tennero il cor saldo.”

52  And I to him: "The affection which thou showest
53  Speaking with me, and the good countenance
54  Which I behold and note in all your ardours,

52  E io a lui: “L'affetto che dimostri
53  meco parlando, e la buona sembianza
54  ch'io veggio e noto in tutti li ardor vostri,

55  In me have so my confidence dilated
56  As the sun doth the rose, when it becomes
57  As far unfolded as it hath the power.

55  così m'ha dilatata mia fidanza,
56  come 'l sol fa la rosa quando aperta
57  tanto divien quant' ell' ha di possanza.

58  Therefore I pray, and thou assure me, father,
59  If I may so much grace receive, that I
60  May thee behold with countenance unveiled."

58  Però ti priego, e tu, padre, m'accerta
59  s'io posso prender tanta grazia, ch'io
60  ti veggia con imagine scoverta.”

61  He thereupon: "Brother, thy high desire
62  In the remotest sphere shall be fulfilled,
63  Where are fulfilled all others and my own.

61  Ond' elli: “Frate, il tuo alto disio
62  s'adempierà in su l'ultima spera,
63  ove s'adempion tutti li altri e 'l mio.

64  There perfect is, and ripened, and complete,
65  Every desire; within that one alone
66  Is every part where it has always been;

64  Ivi è perfetta, matura e intera
65  ciascuna disïanza; in quella sola
66  è ogne parte là ove sempr' era,

67  For it is not in space, nor turns on poles,
68  And unto it our stairway reaches up,
69  Whence thus from out thy sight it steals away.

67  perché non è in loco e non s'impola;
68  e nostra scala infino ad essa varca,
69  onde così dal viso ti s'invola.

70  Up to that height the Patriarch Jacob saw it
71  Extending its supernal part, what time
72  So thronged with angels it appeared to him.

70  Infin là sù la vide il patriarca
71  Iacobbe porger la superna parte,
72  quando li apparve d'angeli sì carca.

73  But to ascend it now no one uplifts
74  His feet from off the earth, and now my Rule
75  Below remaineth for mere waste of paper.

73  Ma, per salirla, mo nessun diparte
74  da terra i piedi, e la regola mia
75  rimasa è per danno de le carte.

76  The walls that used of old to be an Abbey
77  Are changed to dens of robbers, and the cowls
78  Are sacks filled full of miserable flour.

76  Le mura che solieno esser badia
77  fatte sono spelonche, e le cocolle
78  sacca son piene di farina ria.

79  But heavy usury is not taken up
80  So much against God's pleasure as that fruit
81  Which maketh so insane the heart of monks;

79  Ma grave usura tanto non si tolle
80  contra 'l piacer di Dio, quanto quel frutto
81  che fa il cor de' monaci sì folle;

82  For whatsoever hath the Church in keeping
83  Is for the folk that ask it in God's name,
84  Not for one's kindred or for something worse.

82  ché quantunque la Chiesa guarda, tutto
83  è de la gente che per Dio dimanda;
84  non di parenti né d'altro più brutto.

85  The flesh of mortals is so very soft,
86  That good beginnings down below suffice not
87  From springing of the oak to bearing acorns.

85  La carne d'i mortali è tanto blanda,
86  che giù non basta buon cominciamento
87  dal nascer de la quercia al far la ghianda.

88  Peter began with neither gold nor silver,
89  And I with orison and abstinence,
90  And Francis with humility his convent.

88  Pier cominciò sanz' oro e sanz' argento,
89  e io con orazione e con digiuno,
90  e Francesco umilmente il suo convento;

91  And if thou lookest at each one's beginning,
92  And then regardest whither he has run,
93  Thou shalt behold the white changed into brown.

91  e se guardi 'l principio di ciascuno,
92  poscia riguardi là dov' è trascorso,
93  tu vederai del bianco fatto bruno.

94  In verity the Jordan backward turned,
95  And the sea's fleeing, when God willed were more
96  A wonder to behold, than succour here."

94  Veramente Iordan vòlto retrorso
95  più fu, e 'l mar fuggir, quando Dio volse,
96  mirabile a veder che qui 'l soccorso.”

97  Thus unto me he said; and then withdrew
98  To his own band, and the band closed together;
99  Then like a whirlwind all was upward rapt.

97  Così mi disse, e indi si raccolse
98  al suo collegio, e 'l collegio si strinse;
99  poi, come turbo, in sù tutto s'avvolse.

100  The gentle Lady urged me on behind them
101  Up o'er that stairway by a single sign,
102  So did her virtue overcome my nature;

100  La dolce donna dietro a lor mi pinse
101  con un sol cenno su per quella scala,
102  sì sua virtù la mia natura vinse;

103  Nor here below, where one goes up and down
104  By natural law, was motion e'er so swift
105  That it could be compared unto my wing.

103  né mai qua giù dove si monta e cala
104  naturalmente, fu sì ratto moto
105  ch'agguagliar si potesse a la mia ala.

106  Reader, as I may unto that devout
107  Triumph return, on whose account I often
108  For my transgressions weep and beat my breast,—

106  S'io torni mai, lettore, a quel divoto
107  trïunfo per lo quale io piango spesso
108  le mie peccata e 'l petto mi percuoto,

109  Thou hadst not thrust thy finger in the fire
110  And drawn it out again, before I saw
111  The sign that follows Taurus, and was in it.

109  tu non avresti in tanto tratto e messo
110  nel foco il dito, in quant' io vidi 'l segno
111  che segue il Tauro e fui dentro da esso.

112  O glorious stars, O light impregnated
113  With mighty virtue, from which I acknowledge
114  All of my genius, whatsoe'er it be,

112  O glorïose stelle, o lume pregno
113  di gran virtù, dal quale io riconosco
114  tutto, qual che si sia, il mio ingegno,

115  With you was born, and hid himself with you,
116  He who is father of all mortal life,
117  When first I tasted of the Tuscan air;

115  con voi nasceva e s'ascondeva vosco
116  quelli ch'è padre d'ogne mortal vita,
117  quand' io senti' di prima l'aere tosco;

118  And then when grace was freely given to me
119  To enter the high wheel which turns you round,
120  Your region was allotted unto me.

118  e poi, quando mi fu grazia largita
119   d'entrar ne l'alta rota che vi gira,
120  la vostra regïon mi fu sortita.

121  To you devoutly at this hour my soul
122  Is sighing, that it virtue may acquire
123  For the stern pass that draws it to itself.

121  A voi divotamente ora sospira
122  l'anima mia, per acquistar virtute
123  al passo forte che a sé la tira.

124  "Thou art so near unto the last salvation,"
125  Thus Beatrice began, "thou oughtest now
126  To have thine eves unclouded and acute;

124  “Tu se' sì presso a l'ultima salute,”
125  cominciò Bëatrice, “che tu dei
126  aver le luci tue chiare e acute;

127  And therefore, ere thou enter farther in,
128  Look down once more, and see how vast a world
129  Thou hast already put beneath thy feet;

127  e però, prima che tu più t'inlei,
128  rimira in giù, e vedi quanto mondo
129  sotto li piedi già esser ti fei;

130  So that thy heart, as jocund as it may,
131  Present itself to the triumphant throng
132  That comes rejoicing through this rounded ether."

130  sì che 'l tuo cor, quantunque può, giocondo
131  s'appresenti a la turba trïunfante
132  che lieta vien per questo etera tondo.”

133  I with my sight returned through one and all
134  The sevenfold spheres, and I beheld this globe
135  Such that I smiled at its ignoble semblance;

133  Col viso ritornai per tutte quante
134  le sette spere, e vidi questo globo
135 tal, ch'io sorrisi del suo vil sembiante;

136  And that opinion I approve as best
137  Which doth account it least; and he who thinks
138  Of something else may truly be called just.

136  e quel consiglio per migliore approbo
137  che l'ha per meno; e chi ad altro pensa
138  chiamar si puote veramente probo.

139  I saw the daughter of Latona shining
140  Without that shadow, which to me was cause
141  That once I had believed her rare and dense.

139  Vidi la figlia di Latona incensa
140  sanza quell' ombra che mi fu cagione
141  per che già la credetti rara e densa.

142The aspect of thy son, Hyperion,
143  Here I sustained, and saw how move themselves
144  Around and near him Maia and Dione.

142  L'aspetto del tuo nato, Iperïone,
143  quivi sostenni, e vidi com' si move
144  circa e vicino a lui Maia e Dïone.

145  Thence there appeared the temperateness of Jove
146  'Twixt son and father, and to me was clear
147  The change that of their whereabout they make;

145  Quindi m'apparve il temperar di Giove
146  tra 'l padre e 'l figlio; e quindi mi fu chiaro
147  il varïar che fanno di lor dove;

148  And all the seven made manifest to me
149  How great they are, and eke how swift they are,
150  And how they are in distant habitations.

148  e tutti e sette mi si dimostraro
149  quanto son grandi e quanto son veloci
150  e come sono in distante riparo.

151  The threshing-floor that maketh us so proud,
152  To me revolving with the eternal Twins,
153  Was all apparent made from hill to harbour!

151  L'aiuola che ci fa tanto feroci,
152  volgendom' io con li etterni Gemelli,
153  tutta m'apparve da' colli a le foci;

154  Then to the beauteous eyes mine eyes I turned.

154  poscia rivolsi li occhi a li occhi belli.

Canto XXIII
Even as the last canto begins with placing Dante, the aspirant, as a child, as in the Jesus' injunction that none can enter heaven lest they become as children, this canto begins where that childlike human undergoes a metaphoric transformation to that of a celestial creature, namely a bird, and moreover this long introduction begins from the point of view of Beatrice, a mother bird, awaiting in the predawn darkness for the dawn whose light will allow her to begin the search to feed her brood.  We then move quickly back to Dante, that celestial chick, who in his feeling of anticipation, finds his satiation, not in being fed, but in the mere hope that he will be fed.  The whole thing is a remarkable trope, the very idea of darkness and the sun, now in an astrological transformation, the physical sun below the couple now, and whatever we might have thought of day and night as an east/west movement, has changed, the dawn above us, lined up to an ultimate North, this new dawn shining straight down and aligning itself with the earthly Jerusalem, the rays of its ascent/descent filling with photonic beings, whose presence announce the triumph of Christ.  A momentary vision of Christ himself, and all in the aspirant is changed.  How difficult with a mortal mind, thrown behind the curtain of its mortal senses, for the reader to grasp all this!  The poetry has undergone a phase shift, the verses, like water, which was ice at the nadir of Hell, has here become vapor.  A jump has occurred, sudden and irrevocable.  We don't know how the jump has occurred, for its suddenness has obliterated whatever process has enabled the change to be made, and now the poetry itself has changed shape, its music, however formerly moving, its meanings, however formerly profound, have been transformed into something like the attainment of freedom, a freedom that allows the reader to navigate in another dimension, just as a bird, having left the earth, is now able to move freely in the expanded domain of air.  However, all this is but preparation for the apotheosis at the appearance of the queen of Heaven.  In all this expanse of consciousness, we are but embryonic entities gestating in a celestial womb, and the cervix of light which is opening above us, is the passageway to a new form of being, wherein, in our newly granted celestial bodies we are being prepared to meet He who holds the keys to a final revelation.  The spiraling elliptical shape of the poem which has had us going round and round, augering down in the Inferno to the tightest frozen nub of stasis, automaticity, and a point of interminable pain, then uncoiling with pain accepted through the Purgatorio, and then moving in wider and wider circles of wonder throughout Paradise, to finally attain to this sudden transformation of all that spiraling to now be on that straight and narrow path which Christ says so few find.  Although even this straight and narrow path can be said to be a kind of sushumna of a metaphorical tube formed by the rotational energies which constitute Mary's crown.

One thing that stuns the reader is that no matter how long one reads and studies this poem, no matter how many commentaries one reads, one's inadequacy grows.  One wants to do more to somehow penetrate its mysteries, and be more privy to its splendors.  But it's no use, the mysteries grow, the splendors grow, and one is overwhelmed by such a welter of beauties that like the aspirant here, one hopes somehow to be fortified by the contact, so that one becomes somehow, however seemingly impossible, a worthy recipient.  As readers, we are put in the position of Dante, a mere mortal, who astonishes all the entities he meets in these realms, by being inexplicably present.  And it begins to dawn on us, that Dante is not here as a Christian, or even a Christian saint, he is here as a poet.  And we are here because we have honored poetry as a vehicle that connects heaven and earth, so that now all the dancing and singing we have encountered as we ascend, becomes a kind of whirling pillar that not only connects earth to heaven, but upholds the heavens, and serves as a support for its highest glories.  This is a vision and a revelation that stretches back to the very first canto of the Inferno, that these domains of consciousness owe their existence to the poetic enterprise that sustains them because they are a story that must and has been told.   

1  Even as a bird, 'mid the beloved leaves,
2  Quiet upon the nest of her sweet brood
3  Throughout the night, that hideth all things from us,

1  Come l'augello, intra l'amate fronde,
2  posato al nido de' suoi dolci nati
3  la notte che le cose ci nasconde,

4  Who, that she may behold their longed-for looks
5  And find the food wherewith to nourish them,
6  In which, to her, grave labours grateful are,

4  che, per veder li aspetti disïati
5  e per trovar lo cibo onde li pasca,
6  in che gravi labor li sono aggrati,

7  Anticipates the time on open spray
8  And with an ardent longing waits the sun,
9  Gazing intent as soon as breaks the dawn:

7  previene il tempo in su aperta frasca,
8  e con ardente affetto il sole aspetta,
9  fiso guardando pur che l'alba nasca;

10  Even thus my Lady standing was, erect
11  And vigilant, turned round towards the zone
12  Underneath which the sun displays less haste;

10  così la donna mïa stava eretta
11  e attenta, rivolta inver' la plaga
12  sotto la quale il sol mostra men fretta:

13  So that beholding her distraught and wistful,
14  Such I became as he is who desiring
15  For something yearns, and hoping is appeased.

13  sì che, veggendola io sospesa e vaga,
14  fecimi qual è quei che disïando
15  altro vorria, e sperando s'appaga.

16  But brief the space from one When to the other;
17  Of my awaiting, say I, and the seeing
18  The welkin grow resplendent more and more.

16  Ma poco fu tra uno e altro quando,
17  del mio attender, dico, e del vedere
18  lo ciel venir più e più rischiarando;

19  And Beatrice exclaimed: "Behold the hosts
20  Of Christ's triumphal march, and all the fruit
21  Harvested by the rolling of these spheres!"

19  e Bëatrice disse: “Ecco le schiere
20  del trïunfo di Cristo e tutto 'l frutto
21  ricolto del girar di queste spere!”

22  It seemed to me her face was all aflame;
23  And eyes she had so full of ecstasy
24  That I must needs pass on without describing.

22  Pariemi che 'l suo viso ardesse tutto,
23  e li occhi avea di letizia sì pieni,
24  che passarmen convien sanza costrutto.

25  As when in nights serene of the full moon
26  Smiles Trivia among the nymphs eternal
27  Who paint the firmament through all its gulfs,

25  Quale ne' plenilunïi sereni
26  Trivïa ride tra le ninfe etterne
27  che dipingon lo ciel per tutti i seni,

28  Saw I, above the myriads of lamps,
29  A Sun that one and all of them enkindled,
30  E'en as our own doth the supernal sights,

28  vid' i' sopra migliaia di lucerne
29  un sol che tutte quante l'accendea,
30  come fa 'l nostro le viste superne;

31  And through the living light transparent shone
32  The lucent substance so intensely clear
33  Into my sight, that I sustained it not.

31  e per la viva luce trasparea
32  la lucente sustanza tanto chiara
33  nel viso mio, che non la sostenea.

34  O Beatrice, thou gentle guide and dear!
35  To me she said: "What overmasters thee
36  A virtue is from which naught shields itself.

34  Oh Bëatrice, dolce guida e cara!
35  Ella mi disse: “Quel che ti sobranza
36  è virtù da cui nulla si ripara.

37  There are the wisdom and the omnipotence
38  That oped the thoroughfares 'twixt heaven and earth,
39  For which there erst had been so long a yearning."

37  Quivi è la sapïenza e la possanza
38  ch'aprì le strade tra 'l cielo e la terra
39  onde fu già sì lunga disïanza.”

40  As fire from out a cloud unlocks itself,
41  Dilating so it finds not room therein,
42  And down, against its nature, falls to earth,

40  Come foco di nube si diserra
41  per dilatarsi sì che non vi cape,
42  e fuor di sua natura in giù s'atterra,

43  So did my mind, among those aliments
44  Becoming larger, issue from itself,
45  And that which it became cannot remember.

43  la mente mia così, tra quelle dape
44  fatta più grande, di sé stessa uscìo,
45  e che si fesse rimembrar non sape.

46  "Open thine eyes, and look at what I am:
47  Thou hast beheld such things, that strong enough
48  Hast thou become to tolerate my smile."

46  “Apri li occhi e riguarda qual son io;
47  tu hai vedute cose, che possente
48  se' fatto a sostener lo riso mio.”

49  I was as one who still retains the feeling
50  Of a forgotten vision, and endeavours
51  In vain to bring it back into his mind,

49  Io era come quei che si risente
50  di visïone oblita e che s'ingegna
51  indarno di ridurlasi a la mente,

52  When I this invitation heard, deserving
53  Of so much gratitude, it never fades
54  Out of the book that chronicles the past.

52  quand' io udi' questa proferta, degna
53  di tanto grato, che mai non si stingue
54  del libro che 'l preterito rassegna.

55  If at this moment sounded all the tongues
56  That Polyhymnia and her sisters made
57  Most lubrical with their delicious milk,

55  Se mo sonasser tutte quelle lingue
56  che Polimnïa con le suore fero
57  del latte lor dolcissimo più pingue,

58  To aid me, to a thousandth of the truth
59  It would not reach, singing the holy smile
60  And how the holy aspect it illumed.

58  per aiutarmi, al millesmo del vero
59  non si verria, cantando il santo riso
60  e quanto il santo aspetto facea mero;

61  And therefore, representing Paradise,
62  The sacred poem must perforce leap over,
63  Even as a man who finds his way cut off;

61  e così, figurando il paradiso,
62  convien saltar lo sacrato poema,
63  come chi trova suo cammin riciso.

64  But whoso thinketh of the ponderous theme,
65  And of the mortal shoulder laden with it,
66  Should blame it not, if under this it tremble.

64  Ma chi pensasse il ponderoso tema
65  e l'omero mortal che se ne carca,
66  nol biasmerebbe se sott' esso trema:

67  It is no passage for a little boat
68  This which goes cleaving the audacious prow,
69  Nor for a pilot who would spare himself.

67  non è pareggio da picciola barca
68  quel che fendendo va l'ardita prora,
69  né da nocchier ch'a sé medesmo parca.

70  "Why doth my face so much enamour thee,
71  That to the garden fair thou turnest not,
72  Which under the rays of Christ is blossoming?

70  “Perché la faccia mia sì t'innamora,
71  che tu non ti rivolgi al bel giardino
72  che sotto i raggi di Cristo s'infiora?

73  There is the Rose in which the Word Divine
74  Became incarnate; there the lilies are
75  By whose perfume the good way was discovered."

73  Quivi è la rosa in che 'l verbo divino
74  carne si fece; quivi son li gigli
75  al cui odor si prese il buon cammino.”

76  Thus Beatrice; and I, who to her counsels
77  Was wholly ready, once again betook me
78  Unto the battle of the feeble brows.

76  Così Beatrice; e io, che a' suoi consigli
77  tutto era pronto, ancora mi rendei
78  a la battaglia de' debili cigli.

79  As in the sunshine, that unsullied streams
80  Through fractured cloud, ere now a meadow of flowers
81  Mine eyes with shadow covered o'er have seen,

79  Come a raggio di sol, che puro mei
80  per fratta nube, già prato di fiori
81  vider, coverti d'ombra, li occhi miei;

82  So troops of splendours manifold I saw
83  Illumined from above with burning rays,
84  Beholding not the source of the effulgence.

82  vid' io così più turbe di splendori,
83  folgorate di sù da raggi ardenti,
84  sanza veder principio di folgóri.

85  O power benignant that dost so imprint them!
86  Thou didst exalt thyself to give more scope
87  There to mine eyes, that were not strong enough.

85  O benigna vertù che sì li 'mprenti,
86  sù t'essaltasti per largirmi loco
87  i li occhi lì che non t'eran possenti.

88  The name of that fair flower I e'er invoke
89  Morning and evening utterly enthralled
90  My soul to gaze upon the greater fire.

88  Il nome del bel fior ch'io sempre invoco
89  e mane e sera, tutto mi ristrinse
90  l'animo ad avvisar lo maggior foco;

91  And when in both mine eyes depicted were
92  The glory and greatness of the living star
93  Which there excelleth, as it here excelled,

91  e come ambo le luci mi dipinse
92  il quale e il quanto de la viva stella
93  che là sù vince come qua giù vinse,

94  Athwart the heavens a little torch descended
95  Formed in a circle like a coronal,
96  And cinctured it, and whirled itself about it.

94  per entro il cielo scese una facella,
95  formata in cerchio a guisa di corona,
96  e cinsela e girossi intorno ad ella.

97  Whatever melody most sweetly soundeth
98  On earth, and to itself most draws the soul,
99  Would seem a cloud that, rent asunder, thunders,

97  Qualunque melodia più dolce suona
98  qua giù e più a sé l'anima tira,
99  parrebbe nube che squarciata tona,

100  Compared unto the sounding of that lyre
101  Wherewith was crowned the sapphire beautiful,
102  Which gives the clearest heaven its sapphire hue.

100  comparata al sonar di quella lira
101  onde si coronava il bel zaffiro
102  del quale il ciel più chiaro s'inzaffira.

103  "I am Angelic Love, that circle round
104  The joy sublime which breathes from out the womb
105  That was the hostelry of our Desire;

103  “Io sono amore angelico, che giro
104  l'alta letizia che spira del ventre
105  che fu albergo del nostro disiro;

106  And I shall circle, Lady of Heaven, while
107  Thou followest thy Son, and mak'st diviner
108  The sphere supreme, because thou enterest there."

106  e girerommi, donna del ciel, mentre
107  che seguirai tuo figlio, e farai dia
108  più la spera supprema perché lì entre.”

109  Thus did the circulated melody
110  Seal itself up; and all the other lights
111  Were making to resound the name of Mary.

109  Così la circulata melodia
110  si sigillava, e tutti li altri lumi
111  facean sonare il nome di Maria.

112  The regal mantle of the volumes all
113  Of that world, which most fervid is and living
114  With breath of God and with his works and ways,

112  Lo real manto di tutti i volumi
113  del mondo, che più ferve e più s'avviva
114  ne l'alito di Dio e nei costumi,

115  Extended over us its inner border,
116  So very distant, that the semblance of it
117  There where I was not yet appeared to me.

115  avea sopra di noi l'interna riva
116  tanto distante, che la sua parvenza,
117  là dov' io era, ancor non appariva:

118  Therefore mine eyes did not possess the power
119  Of following the incoronated flame,
120  Which mounted upward near to its own seed.

118  però non ebber li occhi miei potenza
119  di seguitar la coronata fiamma
120  che si levò appresso sua semenza.

121  And as a little child, that towards its mother
122  Stretches its arms, when it the milk has taken,
123  Through impulse kindled into outward flame,

121  E come fantolin che 'nver' la mamma
122  tende le braccia, poi che 'l latte prese,
123  per l'animo che 'nfin di fuor s'infiamma;

124  Each of those gleams of whiteness upward reached
125  So with its summit, that the deep affection
126  They had for Mary was revealed to me.

124  ciascun di quei candori in sù si stese
125  con la sua cima, sì che l'alto affetto
126  ch'elli avieno a Maria mi fu palese.

127  Thereafter they remained there in my sight,
128  'Regina coeli' singing with such sweetness,
129   That ne'er from me has the delight departed.

127  Indi rimaser lì nel mio cospetto,
128  “Regina celi” cantando sì dolce,
129  che mai da me non si partì 'l diletto.

130  O, what exuberance is garnered up
131  Within those richest coffers, which had been
132  Good husbandmen for sowing here below!

130  Oh quanta è l'ubertà che si soffolce
131  in quelle arche ricchissime che fuoro
132  a seminar qua giù buone bobolce!
133  There they enjoy and live upon the treasure
134  Which was acquired while weeping in the exile
135  Of Babylon, wherein the gold was left.

133  Quivi si vive e gode del tesoro
134  che s'acquistò piangendo ne lo essilio
135  di Babillòn, ove si lasciò l'oro.

136  There triumpheth, beneath the exalted Son
137  Of God and Mary, in his victory,
138  Both with the ancient council and the new,

136  Quivi trïunfa, sotto l'alto Filio
137   di Dio e di Maria, di sua vittoria,
138  e con l'antico e col novo concilio,

139  He who doth keep the keys of such a glory.

139  colui che tien le chiavi di tal gloria.

Canto XXIV
I declare that the Heaven of Fixed Stars may be compared to Physics on account of three properties, and to Metaphysics on account of another three.  For it displays to us two properties visible within it, the multitudinous stars and the Galaxy, that is the whole circle popularly known as Saint James' Way; and it displays to us one of its movements, that from east to west, while keeping almost hidden from us, its other movement, from west to east.  And so I must explain the similarities first with Physics, then with Metaphysics {...}  Furthermore, the pole of this heaven, which we see signifies things that can be perceived by the senses, which form the subject of Physics; and the pole that signifies things which are without matter, things which cannot be perceived by the senses, which form the subject of Metaphysics.  For this reason then, the heaven under discussion has a close similarity to each of these sciences.  Moreover by its movements it signifies these two sciences. For by the movement in which it every day goes through a revolution, and circles anew to the very point from which it started, it signifies those things in Nature which are subject to decay, which day by day complete their passage, and have their matter transferred from one form to another; these are what Physics considers.  By the almost imperceptible movement this heaven makes from west to east, shifting one degree in a hundred years, it signifies beings not subject to decay, which had a beginning through God's act of creation but will never have an end; these are what Metaphysics considers.  Consequently, I declare that this movement signifies these beings in that their revolution comes  to an end when it returns to the same point, a point which this heaven in pursuing this movement will never reach. For since the beginning of the world little more than a sixth of the revolution has been completed, while we live in the final stage of history, and indeed in expectation of the consummation of the movement of the heavens.  It is clear, then, that the Heaven of the Fixed Stars may on account of many properties be compared to Physics and Metaphysics.  

Convivio II, 1-2, 9-13

What is faith that is not tested?  That's the question that confronts us here.  But by a testing of faith, we usually mean having to confront circumstances that offer no rational or even irrational way out, and not the test that Dante, the aspirant, is subjected to here — an intellectual test wherein a bachelor candidate must stand before the master and give an oral presentation to questions posed to him.  This may seem a rather tame culmination, until we realize that the ordeal that Dante faces, and is still facing, is the ordeal of the poem itself, Dante, the poet, as well as Dante, the aspirant and protagonist of the poem, has staked everything on an impossibility — the witnessing by a mortal man of that which is invisible except to those who have leaped out of temporal existence to become the miracle that is revealed here, and revealed throughout the poem, a miracle that also involves the reader in a high stakes game which catches the reader unawares, and being tested, like the protagonist to find out if he or she has learned or is learning the faith lesson, to find out if this mundane act of reading really can be elevated to the stature of Saint Paul's definition: "faith is the substance of things hoped for/ the evidence of things that are not seen (lines 64,65).  

In the last canto we began with the image of the mother bird awaiting the dawn so that she might hunt for food for her brood, and here Beatrice declares that that food is the food that drops down like manna from the Empyrean, and the satiation of hope itself is here manifested as the evidence that Providence has indeed provided, because the poem itself is the proof that the poet has taken nourishment from his journey and can now stand as master himself revealing his mastery to a Master.  We have here a clear conflation of the poet outside the poem and the aspirant inside the poem, the two conjoined as the single master of faith.  The image of clock wheels turning, and the spinning of the entities encountered here along with that of the movement of the sun and the precession of the constillations provides Dante with a trope which shows how the temporal world of the seen interacts with the eternal world of the unseen, just as the seen aspirant inside the poem is the manifestation of the unseen poet outside the poem.  Two other tropes from subsequent poets come to mind.  Eliot's "still point of the turning world," and Blake's "eternity is in love with the productions of time."  But Dante's imagination is more motile, his figures turn faster or slower depending of the faith that propels them, and it does not take much of a projection by the reader to realize that the stillness at the center of these whirling dervishes must also be greater or lesser according to each entities contemplative depths.

Who then spins fastest, shines brightest of these entities?  Although not mentioned by name, and therefore his name at this point is unseen, the entity which manifests is Saint Peter.  A duple personage, that is, Simon/Peter.  The wavering disciple.  And as often the case with Dante, he has chosen the disciple whose faith is shot through with an undercurrent of doubt, a faith, in other words which has been tested.  The example here is Peter's faith enabling him to walk upon the waves, wherein he is borne up for a while, but then, succumbing to doubt, he sinks, and would have drowned if it were not for the grace of Jesus.  We remember too that Peter three times denied Christ prior to the crucifixion.  The number three is obviously important throughout the canto, and throughout the entire Commedia, which we may assume, in addition to its reference to the trinity, can also be said to correspond to the turn, counter turn, and stand familiar to us from Grecian antiquity — the oscillation is important insofar as it represents the rhythm of faith, doubt, and finally the metaphoric rock of faith tested and holding firm in an invisible stillness.  These movements prevent the verses here from succumbing to the cynicism of irony, irony itself redeemed by a faith whose evidence is the conviction which can withstand the assault of counter example, and instead incorporate it as the proof which moves us to believe without equivocation, which is the miracle non-miracle that the two testaments of the Bible were sufficient and more than sufficient to move the whole Western pagan world to transform itself, and to these two testaments, we may complete another trinity with a third, namely the testament of the Commedia itself.  The 8-century commentary tradition is evidence that Dante's assertion of faith was not authorial arrogance, but a truth that he understood the force that faith has in establishing the transformative power of art.   
												
1  "O company elect to the great supper
2  Of the Lamb benedight, who feedeth you
3  So that for ever full is your desire,

1  “O sodalizio eletto a la gran cena
2  del benedetto Agnello, il qual vi ciba
3  sì, che la vostra voglia è sempre piena,

4  If by the grace of God this man foretaste
5  Something of that which falleth from your table,
6  Or ever death prescribe to him the time,

4  se per grazia di Dio questi preliba
5  di quel che cade de la vostra mensa,
6  prima che morte tempo li prescriba,

7  Direct your mind to his immense desire,
8  And him somewhat bedew; ye drinking are
9  For ever at the fount whence comes his thought."

7  ponete mente a l'affezione immensa
8  e roratelo alquanto: voi bevete
9  sempre del fonte onde vien quel ch'ei pensa.”

10  Thus Beatrice; and those souls beatified
11  Transformed themselves to spheres on steadfast poles,
12  Flaming intensely in the guise of comets.

10  Così Beatrice; e quelle anime liete
11  si fero spere sopra fissi poli,
12  fiammando, volte, a guisa di comete.

13  And as the wheels in works of horologes
14  Revolve so that the first to the beholder
15  Motionless seems, and the last one to fly,

13  E come cerchi in tempra d'orïuoli
14  si giran sì, che 'l primo a chi pon mente
15  quïeto pare, e l'ultimo che voli;

16  So in like manner did those carols, dancing
17  In different measure, of their affluence
18  Give me the gauge, as they were swift or slow.

16  così quelle carole, differente–
17  mente danzando, de la sua ricchezza
18  mi facieno stimar, veloci e lente.

19  From that one which I noted of most beauty
20  Beheld I issue forth a fire so happy
21  That none it left there of a greater brightness;

19  Di quella ch'io notai di più carezza
20  vid' ïo uscire un foco sì felice,
21  che nullo vi lasciò di più chiarezza;

22  And around Beatrice three several times
23  It whirled itself with so divine a song,
24    My fantasy repeats it not to me;

22  e tre fïate intorno di Beatrice
23  si volse con un canto tanto divo,
24  che la mia fantasia nol mi ridice.

25  Therefore the pen skips, and I write it not,
26  Since our imagination for such folds,
27  Much more our speech, is of a tint too glaring.

25  Però salta la penna e non lo scrivo:
26  ché l'imagine nostra a cotai pieghe,
27  non che 'l parlare, è troppo color vivo.

28  "O holy sister mine, who us implorest
29   With such devotion, by thine ardent love
30  Thou dost unbind me from that beautiful sphere!"

28  “O santa suora mia che sì ne prieghe
29  divota, per lo tuo ardente affetto
30  da quella bella spera mi disleghe.”

31  Thereafter, having stopped, the blessed fire
32  Unto my Lady did direct its breath,
33  Which spake in fashion as I here have said.

31  Poscia fermato, il foco benedetto
32  a la mia donna dirizzò lo spiro,
33  che favellò così com' i' ho detto.

34  And she: "O light eterne of the great man
35  To whom our Lord delivered up the keys
36  He carried down of this miraculous joy,

34  Ed ella: “O luce etterna del gran viro
35  a cui Nostro Segnor lasciò le chiavi,
36  ch'ei portò giù, di questo gaudio miro,

37  This one examine on points light and grave,
38  As good beseemeth thee, about the Faith
39  By means of which thou on the sea didst walk.

37  tenta costui di punti lievi e gravi,
38  come ti piace, intorno de la fede,
39  per la qual tu su per lo mare andavi.

40  If he love well, and hope well, and believe,
41  From thee 'tis hid not; for thou hast thy sight
42  There where depicted everything is seen.

40  S'elli ama bene e bene spera e crede,
41  non t'è occulto, perché 'l viso hai quivi
42  dov' ogne cosa dipinta si vede;

43  But since this kingdom has made citizens
44  By means of the true Faith, to glorify it
45  'Tis well he have the chance to speak thereof."

43  ma perché questo regno ha fatto civi
44  per la verace fede, a glorïarla,
45  di lei parlare è ben ch'a lui arrivi.”

46  As baccalaureate arms himself, and speaks not
47  Until the master doth propose the question,
48  To argue it, and not to terminate it,

46  Sì come il baccialier s'arma e non parla
 47 fin che 'l maestro la question propone,
48  per approvarla, non per terminarla,

49  So did I arm myself with every reason,
50  While she was speaking, that I might be ready
51  For such a questioner and such profession.

49  così m'armava io d'ogne ragione
50  mentre ch'ella dicea, per esser presto
51  a tal querente e a tal professione.

52  "Say, thou good Christian; manifest thyself;
53  What is the Faith?" Whereat I raised my brow
54  Unto that light wherefrom was this breathed forth.

52  “Dì, buon Cristiano, fatti manifesto:
53  fede che è?” Ond' io levai la fronte
54  in quella luce onde spirava questo;

55  Then turned I round to Beatrice, and she
56  Prompt signals made to me that I should pour
57  The water forth from my internal fountain.

55  poi mi volsi a Beatrice, ed essa pronte
56  sembianze femmi perch'ïo spandessi
57  l'acqua di fuor del mio interno fonte.

58  "May grace, that suffers me to make confession,"
59  Began I, "to the great centurion,
60  Cause my conceptions all to be explicit!"

58  “La Grazia che mi dà ch'io mi confessi,”
59  comincia' io, “da l'alto primipilo,
60  faccia li miei concetti bene espressi.”

61  And I continued: "As the truthful pen,
62  Father, of thy dear brother wrote of it,
63  Who put with thee Rome into the good way,

61  E seguitai: “Come 'l verace stilo
62  ne scrisse, padre, del tuo caro frate
63  che mise teco Roma nel buon filo,

64  Faith is the substance of the things we hope for,
65  And evidence of those that are not seen;
66  And this appears to me its quiddity."

64  fede è sustanza di cose sperate
65  e argomento de le non parventi;
66  e questa pare a me sua quiditate.”

67  Then heard I: "Very rightly thou perceivest,
68  If well thou understandest why he placed it
69  With substances and then with evidences."

67  Allora udi': “Dirittamente senti,
68  se bene intendi perché la ripuose
69  tra le sustanze, e poi tra li argomenti.”

70  And I thereafterward: "The things profound,
71  That here vouchsafe to me their apparition,
72  Unto all eyes below are so concealed,

70  E io appresso: “Le profonde cose
71  che mi largiscon qui la lor parvenza,
72  a li occhi di là giù son sì ascose,

73  That they exist there only in belief,
74  Upon the which is founded the high hope,
75  And hence it takes the nature of a substance.

73  che l'esser loro v'è in sola credenza,
74  sopra la qual si fonda l'alta spene;
75  e però di sustanza prende intenza.

76  And it behoveth us from this belief
77  To reason without having other sight,
78  And hence it has the nature of evidence."

76  E da questa credenza ci convene
77  silogizzar, sanz' avere altra vista:
78  però intenza d'argomento tene.”

79  Then heard I: "If whatever is acquired
80  Below by doctrine were thus understood,
81  No sophist's subtlety would there find place."

79  Allora udi': “Se quantunque s'acquista
80  giù per dottrina, fosse così 'nteso,
81  non lì avria loco ingegno di sofista.”

82  Thus was breathed forth from that enkindled love;
83  Then added: "Very well has been gone over
84  Already of this coin the alloy and weight;

82  Così spirò di quello amore acceso;
83  indi soggiunse: “Assai bene è trascorsa
84  d'esta moneta già la lega e 'l peso;

85  But tell me if thou hast it in thy purse?"
86  And I: "Yes, both so shining and so round
87  That in its stamp there is no peradventure."

85  ma dimmi se tu l'hai ne la tua borsa.”
86  Ond' io: “Sì ho, sì lucida e sì tonda,
87  che nel suo conio nulla mi s'inforsa.”

88  Thereafter issued from the light profound
89  That there resplendent was: "This precious jewel,
90  Upon the which is every virtue founded,

88  Appresso uscì de la luce profonda
89  che lì splendeva: “Questa cara gioia
90  sopra la quale ogne virtù si fonda,

91  Whence hadst thou it?" And I: "The large outpouring
92  Of Holy Spirit, which has been diffused
93  Upon the ancient parchments and the new,

91  onde ti venne?” E io: “La larga ploia
92  de lo Spirito Santo, ch'è diffusa
93  in su le vecchie e 'n su le nuove cuoia,

94  A syllogism is, which proved it to me
95  With such acuteness, that, compared therewith,
96  All demonstration seems to me obtuse."

94  è silogismo che la m'ha conchiusa
95  acutamente sì, che 'nverso d'ella
96  ogne dimostrazion mi pare ottusa.”

97  And then I heard: "The ancient and the new
98  Postulates, that to thee are so conclusive,
99  Why dost thou take them for the word divine?"

97  Io udi' poi: “L'antica e la novella
98  proposizion che così ti conchiude,
99  perché l'hai tu per divina favella?”

100  And I: "The proofs, which show the truth to me,
101  Are the works subsequent, whereunto Nature
102  Ne'er heated iron yet, nor anvil beat."

100  E io: “La prova che 'l ver mi dischiude,
101 son l'opere seguite, a che natura
102  non scalda ferro mai né batte incude.”

103  'Twas answered me: "Say, who assureth thee
104  That those works ever were? the thing itself
105  That must be proved, nought else to thee affirms it."

103  Risposto fummi: “Dì, chi t'assicura
104  che quell' opere fosser? Quel medesmo
105  che vuol provarsi, non altri, il ti giura.”

106  "Were the world to Christianity converted,"
107  I said, "withouten miracles, this one
108  Is such, the rest are not its hundredth part;

106  “Se 'l mondo si rivolse al cristianesmo,”
107  diss' io, “sanza miracoli, quest' uno
108  è tal, che li altri non sono il centesmo:

109  Because that poor and fasting thou didst enter
110  Into the field to sow there the good plant,
111  Which was a vine and has become a thorn!"

109  ché tu intrasti povero e digiuno
110  in campo, a seminar la buona pianta
111  che fu già vite e ora è fatta pruno.”

112  This being finished, the high, holy Court
113  Resounded through the spheres, "One God we praise!"
114  In melody that there above is chanted.

112  Finito questo, l'alta corte santa
113  risonò per le spere un “Dio laudamo”
114  ne la melode che là sù si canta.

115  And then that Baron, who from branch to branch,
116  Examining, had thus conducted me,
117  Till the extremest leaves we were approaching,

115  E quel baron che sì di ramo in ramo,
114   essaminando, già tratto m'avea,
115   che a l'ultime fronde appressavamo,

118  Again began: "The Grace that dallying
119  Plays with thine intellect thy mouth has opened,
120  Up to this point, as it should opened be,

118  ricominciò: “La Grazia, che donnea
119  con la tua mente, la bocca t'aperse
120  infino a qui come aprir si dovea,

121  So that I do approve what forth emerged;
122  But now thou must express what thou believest,
123  And whence to thy belief it was presented."

121  sì ch'io approvo ciò che fuori emerse;
122  ma or convien espremer quel che credi,
123  e onde a la credenza tua s'offerse.”

124  "O holy father, spirit who beholdest
125  What thou believedst so that thou o'ercamest,
126  Towards the sepulchre, more youthful feet,"

124  “O santo padre, e spirito che vedi
125  ciò che credesti sì, che tu vincesti
126  ver' lo sepulcro più giovani piedi,”

127  Began I, "thou dost wish me in this place
128  The form to manifest of my prompt belief,
129  And likewise thou the cause thereof demandest.

127  comincia' io, “tu vuo' ch'io manifesti
128  la forma qui del pronto creder mio,
129  e anche la cagion di lui chiedesti.

130  And I respond: In one God I believe,
131  Sole and eterne, who moveth all the heavens
132  With love and with desire, himself unmoved;

130  E io rispondo: Io credo in uno Dio
131  solo ed etterno, che tutto 'l ciel move,
132  non moto, con amore e con disio;

133  And of such faith not only have I proofs
134  Physical and metaphysical, but gives them
135  Likewise the truth that from this place rains down

133  e a tal creder non ho io pur prove
134  fisice e metafisice, ma dalmi
135  anche la verità che quinci piove

136  Through Moses, through the Prophets and the Psalms,
137  Through the Evangel, and through you, who wrote
138  After the fiery Spirit sanctified you;

136  per Moïsè, per profeti e per salmi,
137  per l'Evangelio e per voi che scriveste
138  poi che l'ardente Spirto vi fé almi;

139  In Persons three eterne believe, and these
140  One essence I believe, so one and trine
141  They bear conjunction both with 'sunt' and 'est.'

139  e credo in tre persone etterne, e queste
140  credo una essenza sì una e sì trina,
141  che soffera congiunto 'sono' ed 'este.'

142  With the profound condition and divine
143  Which now I touch upon, doth stamp my mind
144  Ofttimes the doctrine evangelical.

142  De la profonda condizion divina
143  ch'io tocco mo, la mente mi sigilla
144  più volte l'evangelica dottrina.

145  This the beginning is, this is the spark
146  Which afterwards dilates to vivid flame,
147  And, like a star in heaven, is sparkling in me."

145  Quest' è 'l principio, quest' è la favilla
146  che si dilata in fiamma poi vivace,
147  e come stella in cielo in me scintilla.”

148  Even as a lord who hears what pleaseth him
149  His servant straight embraces, gratulating
150  For the good news as soon as he is silent;

148  Come 'l segnor ch'ascolta quel che i piace,
149  da indi abbraccia il servo, gratulando
150  per la novella, tosto ch'el si tace;

151  So, giving me its benediction, singing,
152  Three times encircled me, when I was silent,
153  The apostolic light, at whose command

151  così, benedicendomi cantando,
152  tre volte cinse me, sì com' io tacqui,
153  l'appostolico lume al cui comando

154  I spoken had, in speaking I so pleased him.

154  io avea detto: sì nel dir li piacqui!

Canto XXV
My first notes on this canto dictated into my phone while I was in the hospital read:

The hope Dante abandoned upon entering Hell is here restored.  That circle impossibly completed, not through arrogance on the poet’s part, but by divine grace. Thus the truth of Dante’s definition of hope is ratified, and if any pride is on display here it is Beatrice’s pride in her protégée.  Dante goes to great lengths in this Canto to exalt his status as a poet without seeming to resort to braggadocio.  His own name is exalted and except that of Saint Peter his other interlocutors are only periphrastically alluded to.

That was to be my opening salvo, and this paragraph was meant to wrap things up:

The various references to the blinding radiance of revelations obscuring yet revealing the nature of hope bring this canto to a conclusion with a couple of rhyming tropes: one the statement by an unnamed Saint John that his body is clay on earth and not where Dante supposes it is, in heaven.  And the final poignant disappearance of Beatrice wherein her inspiration obliterates her very presence.  When a meditator grows calm enough that the blue pearl of the third eye suddenly appears between the brows, the shock of that inner effulgence shakes one out of the state.  So here when hope comes to fruition, Beatrice, the source that has led to this transformation, is disconcertingly effaced.

Nothing wrong with either of these two gambits, except that they are in style, if not in substance, so much intellectual dodginess attempting to avoid an emotion that perhaps Hope is the antidote for — an emotion that modernity refers to as "anxiety."  I have read this canto over and over, had many revelations concerning its theme, but in the end, my own health problems, my own anxiety, has prevented me from being able to read anything genuine and honest — emotionally honest at least — in the argument that the baccalaureate Dante is putting forth here.  Until those last verses, when Dante tumbles into despair at losing sight of Beatrice, and experiencing that sudden anxiety, even in the very midst of Paradise — this happy world — I cannot say that I believe that the entire rest of the canto on Hope is anything but a brave whistling in the dark facade that Dante, the orthodox Christian philosopher, would dearly like to be true, but which Dante the poet feels is not.  Just as that little vignette which begins this canto — of him returning to Florence to receive the laurel crown — is a bit wishful thinking, and maybe even his crowning by Saint Peter is only an exalted form of the same, something to make his contemporaries jealous or ashamed, surely Dante negates all that in the end: When John reminds the aspirant, Dante, that John's body is but rotting clay — earth on Earth, and that the chimera his eyes search for and his ears want to believe, is not really there.  

Dante is making some extraordinary claims in this canto regarding the role of, and the powers of poetry — whose power is on a par with scripture to not only inculcate belief and foment Hope — but to do something more miraculous.  To do what I am doing right now, up in the middle of the night, at 5 a.m., anxiously awaiting a medical procedure whose outcome I fear, that is to say, to bring the mind to a calmer place through the radiance of The Word.  Though the eye may be dazzled, the dream-body solaced by ecstatic dance, the ears delighted by joyful song, the soul is in its essence something which needs more than those things, it needs Earth, not the metaphor of sheep and wolves that begin this canto, but the actual smell and presence of the animal, the fleece of one's skin, the fear of becoming prey, a weight of physicality which each of us possesses as we read this poem.  There are only three physical beings in Paradise, which James makes clear: and two of them are not here, namely, Jesus and Mary.  The third who is here, and who has brought all of his readers with him, through the power of his verse, is Dante — not Dante the promulgator of Christian orthodoxy — but Dante the poet.  In this canto, for the first time, he actually calls himself a poet.  Nobody can say that, but somebody must be bold, or arrogant, or crazy enough to say it.  The hope of poetry requires poets who may themselves by fixated by despair, but that does not prevent them from carrying on with their impossible task, not just to find felicity in the midst of Earth's unending injustices, pains, and anxiety, but also to remind us in Paradise of smells and tastes which the Word exalts, even though they are so often productive of our deepest terrors. 

I do not want to end these notes by implying that some kind of exalted or noble form of acceptance of our Earthly condition, even through the medium of poetry, in any way dispels or mitigates those anxieties.  There is a shadow that clings to us even in the midst of our brightest and most blinding inspirations.  The miracle of Paradise is that its immortal joys arise from the maw of suffering and death.  The anxious insomniac at the end of his or her rope in the smallest hours of night continues to peer into that shadow until it shines, shines like the red retinas of those wolves lurking just beyond the sheepfold.  The irony of this canto is that the wolf too is hopeful.

1  If e'er it happen that the Poem Sacred,
2  To which both heaven and earth have set their hand,
3  So that it many a year hath made me lean,

1  Se mai continga che 'l poema sacro
2  al quale ha posto mano e cielo e terra,
3  sì che m'ha fatto per molti anni macro,

4  O'ercome the cruelty that bars me out
5  From the fair sheepfold, where a lamb I slumbered,
6  An enemy to the wolves that war upon it,

4  vinca la crudeltà che fuor mi serra
5  del bello ovile ov' io dormi' agnello,
6  nimico ai lupi che li danno guerra;

7  With other voice forthwith, with other fleece
8  Poet will I return, and at my font
9  Baptismal will I take the laurel crown;

7  con altra voce omai, con altro vello
8  ritornerò poeta, e in sul fonte
9  del mio battesmo prenderò 'l cappello;

10  Because into the Faith that maketh known
11  All souls to God there entered I, and then
12  Peter for her sake thus my brow encircled.

10  però che ne la fede, che fa conte
11  l'anime a Dio, quivi intra' io, e poi
12  Pietro per lei sì mi girò la fronte.

13  Thereafterward towards us moved a light
14  Out of that band whence issued the first-fruits
15  Which of his vicars Christ behind him left,

13  Indi si mosse un lume verso noi
14  di quella spera ond' uscì la primizia
15  che lasciò Cristo d'i vicari suoi;

16  And then my Lady, full of ecstasy,
17  Said unto me: "Look, look! behold the Baron
18  For whom below Galicia is frequented."

16  e la mia donna, piena di letizia,
17  mi disse: “Mira, mira: ecco il barone
18  per cui là giù si vicita Galizia.”

19  In the same way as, when a dove alights
20  Near his companion, both of them pour forth,
21  Circling about and murmuring, their affection,

19  Sì come quando il colombo si pone
20  presso al compagno, l'uno a l'altro pande,
21  girando e mormorando, l'affezione;

22  So one beheld I by the other grand
23  Prince glorified to be with welcome greeted,
24  Lauding the food that there above is eaten.

22  così vid' ïo l'un da l'altro grande
23   principe glorïoso essere accolto,
24  laudando il cibo che là sù li prande.

25  But when their gratulations were complete,
26  Silently 'coram me' each one stood still,
27  So incandescent it o'ercame my sight.

25  Ma poi che 'l gratular si fu assolto,
26  tacito coram me ciascun s'affisse,
27  ignito sì che vincëa 'l mio volto.

28  Smiling thereafterwards, said Beatrice:
29  "Illustrious life, by whom the benefactions
30  Of our Basilica have been described,

28  Ridendo allora Bëatrice disse:
29  “Inclita vita per cui la larghezza
30  de la nostra basilica si scrisse,

31  Make Hope resound within this altitude;
32  Thou knowest as oft thou dost personify it
33  As Jesus to the three gave greater clearness."—

31  fa risonar la spene in questa altezza:
32  tu sai, che tante fiate la figuri,
33  quante lesù ai tre fé più carezza.”

34  "Lift up thy head, and make thyself assured;
35  For what comes hither from the mortal world
36  Must needs be ripened in our radiance."

34  “Leva la testa e fa che t'assicuri:
35  ché ciò che vien qua sù del mortal mondo,
36  convien ch'ai nostri raggi si maturi.”

37  This comfort came to me from the second fire;
38  Wherefore mine eyes I lifted to the hills,
39  Which bent them down before with too great weight.

37  Questo conforto del foco secondo
38  mi venne; ond' io leväi li occhi a' monti
39  che li 'ncurvaron pria col troppo pondo.

40  "Since, through his grace, our Emperor wills that thou
41   Shouldst find thee face to face, before thy death,
42  In the most secret chamber, with his Counts,

40  “Poi che per grazia vuol che tu t'affronti
41  lo nostro Imperadore, anzi la morte,
42  ne l'aula più secreta co' suoi conti,

43  So that, the truth beholden of this court,
44  Hope, which below there rightfully enamours,
45  Thereby thou strengthen in thyself and others,

43  sì che, veduto il ver di questa corte,
44  la spene, che là giù bene innamora,
45  in te e in altrui di ciò conforte,

46  Say what it is, and how is flowering with it
47  Thy mind, and say from whence it came to thee."
48  Thus did the second light again continue.

46  dì quel ch'ell' è, dì come se ne 'nfiora
47  la mente tua, e dì onde a te venne.”
48  Così seguì 'l secondo lume ancora.

49  And the Compassionate, who piloted
50  The plumage of my wings in such high flight,
51  Did in reply anticipate me thus:

49  E quella pïa che guidò le penne
50  de le mie ali a così alto volo,
51  a la risposta così mi prevenne:

52  "No child whatever the Church Militant
53  Of greater hope possesses, as is written
54  In that Sun which irradiates all our band;

52  “La Chiesa militante alcun figliuolo
53  non ha con più speranza, com' è scritto
54  nel Sol che raggia tutto nostro stuolo:

55  Therefore it is conceded him from Egypt
56  To come into Jerusalem to see,
57  Or ever yet his warfare be completed.

55  però li è conceduto che d'Egitto
56  vegna in Ierusalemme per vedere,
57  anzi che 'l militar li sia prescritto.

58  The two remaining points, that not for knowledge
59  Have been demanded, but that he report
60  How much this virtue unto thee is pleasing,

58  Li altri due punti, che non per sapere
59  son dimandati, ma perch' ei rapporti
60  quanto questa virtù t'è in piacere,

61  To him I leave; for hard he will not find them,
62  Nor of self-praise; and let him answer them;
63  And may the grace of God in this assist him!"

61  a lui lasc' io, ché non li saran forti
62  né di iattanza; ed elli a ciò risponda,
63  e la grazia di Dio ciò li comporti.”

64  As a disciple, who his teacher follows,
65  Ready and willing, where he is expert,
66  That his proficiency may be displayed,

64  Come discente ch'a dottor seconda
65  pronto e libente in quel ch'elli è esperto,
66  perché la sua bontà si disasconda,

67  "Hope," said I, "is the certain expectation
68  Of future glory, which is the effect
69  Of grace divine and merit precedent.

67  “Spene,” diss' io, “è uno attender certo
68  de la gloria futura, il qual produce
69  grazia divina e precedente merto.

70  From many stars this light comes unto me;
71  But he instilled it first into my heart
72  Who was chief singer unto the chief captain.

70  Da molte stelle mi vien questa luce;
71  ma quei la distillò nel mio cor pria
72  che fu sommo cantor del sommo duce.

73  'Sperent in te,' in the high Theody
74  He sayeth, 'those who know thy name;' and who
75  Knoweth it not, if he my faith possess?

73  'Sperino in te,' ne la sua tëodia
74  dice, 'color che sanno il nome tuo':
75  e chi nol sa, s'elli ha la fede mia?

76  Thou didst instil me, then, with his instilling
77  In the Epistle, so that I am full,
78  And upon others rain again your rain."

76  Tu mi stillasti, con lo stillar suo,
77  ne la pistola poi; sì ch'io son pieno,
78  e in altrui vostra pioggia repluo.”

79  While I was speaking, in the living bosom
80  Of that combustion quivered an effulgence,
81  Sudden and frequent, in the guise of lightning;

79  Mentr' io diceva, dentro al vivo seno
80  di quello incendio tremolava un lampo
81  sùbito e spesso a guisa di baleno.

82  Then breathed: "The love wherewith I am inflamed
83  Towards the virtue still which followed me
84  Unto the palm and issue of the field,

82  Indi spirò: “L'amore ond'ïo avvampo
83  ancor ver' la virtù che mi seguette
84  infin la palma e a l'uscir del campo,

85  Wills that I breathe to thee that thou delight
86  In her; and grateful to me is thy telling
87  Whatever things Hope promises to thee."

85  vuol ch'io respiri a te che ti dilette
86  di lei; ed emmi a grato che tu diche
87  quello che la speranza ti 'mpromette.”

88  And I: "The ancient Scriptures and the new
89  The mark establish, and this shows it me,
90  Of all the souls whom God hath made his friends.

88  E io: “Le nove e le scritture antiche
89  pongon lo segno, ed esso lo mi addita,
90  de l'anime che Dio s'ha fatte amiche.

91  Isaiah saith, that each one garmented
92  In his own land shall be with twofold garments,
93  And his own land is this delightful life.

91  Dice Isaia che ciascuna vestita
92  ne la sua terra fia di doppia vesta:
93  e la sua terra è questa dolce vita;

94  Thy brother, too, far more explicitly,
95  There where he treateth of the robes of white,
96  This revelation manifests to us."

94  e 'l tuo fratello assai vie più digesta,
95  là dove tratta de le bianche stole,
96  questa revelazion ci manifesta.”

97  And first, and near the ending of these words,
98  "Sperent in te" from over us was heard,
99  To which responsive answered all the carols.

97  E prima, appresso al fin d'este parole,
98  “Sperent in te” di sopr' a noi s'udì;
99  a che rispuoser tutte le carole.

100  Thereafterward a light among them brightened,
101  So that, if Cancer one such crystal had,
102  Winter would have a month of one sole day.

100  Poscia tra esse un lume si schiarì
101  sì che, se 'l Cancro avesse un tal cristallo,
102  l'inverno avrebbe un mese d'un sol dì.

103  And as uprises, goes, and enters the dance
104  A winsome maiden, only to do honour
105  To the new bride, and not from any failing,

103  E come surge e va ed entra in ballo
104  vergine lieta, sol per fare onore
105  a la novizia, non per alcun fallo,

106  Even thus did I behold the brightened splendour
107  Approach the two, who in a wheel revolved
108  As was beseeming to their ardent love.

106  così vid' io lo schiarato splendore
107  venire a' due che si volgieno a nota
108  qual conveniesi al loro ardente amore.

109  Into the song and music there it entered;
110  And fixed on them my Lady kept her look,
111  Even as a bride silent and motionless.

109  Misesi lì nel canto e ne la rota;
110  e la mia donna in lor tenea l'aspetto,
111  pur come sposa tacita e immota.

112  "This is the one who lay upon the breast
113  Of him our Pelican; and this is he
114  To the great office from the cross elected."

112  “Questi è colui che giacque sopra 'l petto
113  del nostro pellicano, e questi fue
114   di su la croce al grande officio eletto.”

115  My Lady thus; but therefore none the more
116  Did move her sight from its attentive gaze
117  Before or afterward these words of hers.

115  La donna mia così; né però piùe
116  mosser la vista sua di stare attenta
117  poscia che prima le parole sue.

118  Even as a man who gazes, and endeavours
119  To see the eclipsing of the sun a little,
120  And who, by seeing, sightless doth become,

118  Qual è colui ch'adocchia e s'argomenta
119  di vedere eclissar lo sole un poco,
120  che, per veder, non vedente diventa;

121  So I became before that latest fire,
122  While it was said, "Why dost thou daze thyself
123  To see a thing which here hath no existence?

121  tal mi fec'ïo a quell' ultimo foco
122  mentre che detto fu: “Perché t'abbagli
123  per veder cosa che qui non ha loco?

124  Earth in the earth my body is, and shall be
125  With all the others there, until our number
126  With the eternal proposition tallies.

124  In terra è terra il mio corpo, e saragli
125  tanto con li altri, che 'l numero nostro
126  con l'etterno proposito s'agguagli.

127  With the two garments in the blessed cloister
128  Are the two lights alone that have ascended:
129  And this shalt thou take back into your world."
127  Con le due stole nel beato chiostro
128  son le due luci sole che saliro;
129  e questo apporterai nel mondo vostro.”

130  And at this utterance the flaming circle
131  Grew quiet, with the dulcet intermingling
132  Of sound that by the trinal breath was made,

130  A questa voce l'infiammato giro
131  si quïetò con esso il dolce mischio
132  che si facea nel suon del trino spiro,

133  As to escape from danger or fatigue
134  The oars that erst were in the water beaten
135  Are all suspended at a whistle's sound.

133  sì come, per cessar fatica o rischio,
134  li remi, pria ne l'acqua ripercossi,
135  tutti si posano al sonar d'un fischio.

136  Ah, how much in my mind was I disturbed,
137  When I turned round to look on Beatrice,
138  That her I could not see, although I was


136  Ahi quanto ne la mente mi commossi,
137  quando mi volsi per veder Beatrice,
138  per non poter veder, benché io fossi

139  Close at her side and in the Happy World!

139  presso di lei, e nel mondo felice!

Canto XXVI
If we try to understand Dante with only the tools we natively possessed before encountering him, we will have wasted our experience of reading him.  For more than any poet or author that I know, he gives us the tools in his work to expand our methods of understanding — with heart, with mind, with senses.   He not only gives us the tools to deeply delve his Commedia, but he also shows us how it is possible to use language as a catalyst of understanding between ourselves and other human beings, and, more astonishingly, as a tool to evolve how our understanding can reach out to explore and to augment the nature of Nature and the nature of the underlying intelligence from which Nature evolves.

I find that as I have proceeded in these readings, and especially in these notes, that my approach has slowed down, my confidence waning.  Maybe this is due to my illness, and the difficulty I have in finding as my body has suffered, that bliss, which is described repeatedly in the Paradiso.  But I think there is more to it than that.  He asks here that the mind and heart explore limits, or boundaries, which in Dante's text is the word "segno," sign, a word that has a huge number of meanings, 18 according to Google Translate, and it is the transgression of this segno, which Adam says was the cause of his expulsion from Eden.  But let me backtrack, and see if I can iterate some of the signs, the boundary lines, that make this canto a cosmos, and not a chaos.  Dante seems here to be linking things together, Virgil's, or to be more precise, philosophic reason, and Beatrice's love.  The whole thing whirls around the metaphor of blindness, the limits of sight have been transcended, and now it is hearing, and specifically speech, which forges cosmos from chaos.  I think it is weird that Saint John's speech is heard on a breath — spiro — a trope is used twice in the canto.  Previously in the Commedia, breath has been an exclusive property of Dante, a living physical being among shades and spirits, but here, a spirit, who has already in the previous canto declared himself an illusion — not there/here — his body buried on Earth, is breathing, and launching articulate speech upon the current of that breath.  Speaking and breath are the prerogative of the living, whether on Earth or in any of the three domains of what we now refer to as the afterlife.  And at the end of this canto, Adam makes it clear that these signs, made comprehensible by speaking, are mutable, precisely because they lie within the orbit of human logic and reason.  Reason's boundaries are flexible.  But in an inflexible way, they are determined by speech.  We might note that so often in the Inferno — since so much of that realm was dark, and impenetrable to light and sight — the order of sense modalities was hear/see, or even smell/hear/see.  This sequence has often been reversed in the Paradiso, so that we see first, and then hear.  But in this canto, the blind Dante, must hear first, and what he hears is the breathy speech of Saint John.  The obvious allusion here is to Saint Paul on his road to Damascus.  Paul is blinded and knocked off his horse, and when restored, he has a new name, a new life, and a new goal.  Indeed goals, the soul's goals, are an issue in this canto, when, using the arrow trope again, Saint John askes Dante what are his goals.  Everywhere here signs set boundaries, those limits being placed between philosophic reason and the allure of love, the Old testament of Genesis and the New of John's gospel, the beginning of Dante's journey through the realms of the Commedia and the ultimate earthly beginning of Adam in Eden.  The original Eden here is defined as the same place from which Dante, lost and in despair, begins his poetic trek.  One of the things that has puzzled me is how much of the pain of Hell is constantly and bitterly referred to in Heaven.  Is this too a question of setting boundaries?  Here it is an eagle, a bird of prey, and God's bite, that sets a boundary to suffering by imposing suffering.  On the other side of this suffering, is the love and healing (let's not forget that!), which pours from the light of the Beatrice's eyes.  We are guided to the ultimate revelation by the lure of love, the radiance of goodness, and, by the bite of wrath, regret, and retribution.  I think it is significant too, that in this canto, Dante asserts that all of existence is the expression of love, although that love can become twisted — "torto" — as it is in Hell, where the denizens have chosen to continuously embrace the evil, which causes them pain. 

The ending of this canto sounds very strange to modern ears, all those numbers of years and hours which Adam has endured from the moment of his creation.  Adam tells us the times of his life in Eden, his physical life, and the lifespan of the Earth since his expulsion from Eden.  To the medieval mind, these numbers might have seemed quite literal, for us, they must be symbols, references to proportionality.  The proportion the moments of innocence and bliss is tiny compared to the days and years of our life, and the proportion of our lives to the life of Earth is but a fraction.   Above all, these numbers are an indication that just as there are spatial limits to the created cosmos, there are also temporal ones.  To transgress either of these two boundaries, for Dante, is to descend into inarticulate non-existence, a taste of which seems to be emblematically presented in that frozen, wind machine of Satan, who has lost all subjective presence and exists merely as a pain-producing process.  But it should be noted, that still this figure sets a boundary, a boundary defined by linguistic signs.  Beyond this humans cannot go.  Blake had a curious aphorism which may be apropos as a conclusion here:  

There is a limit of Opakeness, and a limit of Contraction:
In every individual man, and the limit of Opakeness
Is named Satan, and the limit of Contraction is named Adam.

1  While I was doubting for my vision quenched,
2  Out of the flame refulgent that had quenched it
3  Issued a breathing, that attentive made me,

1  Mentr'io dubbiava per lo viso spento,
2  de la fulgida fiamma che lo spense
3  uscì un spiro che mi fece attento,

4  Saying: "While thou recoverest the sense
5  Of seeing which in me thou hast consumed,
6  'Tis well that speaking thou shouldst compensate it.

4  dicendo: “Intanto che tu ti risense
5  de la vista che haï in me consunta,
6  ben è che ragionando la compense.

7  Begin then, and declare to what thy soul
8  Is aimed, and count it for a certainty,
9  Sight is in thee bewildered and not dead;

7  Comincia dunque; e dì ove s'appunta
8  l'anima tua, e fa ragion che sia
9  la vista in te smarrita e non defunta:

10  Because the Lady, who through this divine
11  Region conducteth thee, has in her look
12  The power the hand of Ananias had."

10  perché la donna che per questa dia
11  regïon ti conduce, ha ne lo sguardo
12  la virtù ch'ebbe la man d'Anania.”

13  I said: "As pleaseth her, or soon or late
14  Let the cure come to eyes that portals were
15  When she with fire I ever burn with entered.

13  Io dissi: “Al suo piacere e tosto e tardo
14  vegna remedio a li occhi, che fuor porte
15  quand' ella entrò col foco ond' io sempr' ardo.

16  The Good, that gives contentment to this Court,
17  The Alpha and Omega is of all
18  The writing that love reads me low or loud."

16  Lo ben che fa contenta questa corte,
17  Alfa e O è di quanta scrittura
18  mi legge Amore o lievemente o forte.”

19  The selfsame voice, that taken had from me
20  The terror of the sudden dazzlement,
21  To speak still farther put it in my thought;

19  Quella medesma voce che paura
20  tolta m'avea del sùbito abbarbaglio,
21  di ragionare ancor mi mise in cura;

22  And said: "In verity with finer sieve
23  Behoveth thee to sift; thee it behoveth
24  To say who aimed thy bow at such a target."

22  e disse: “Certo a più angusto vaglio
 23 ti conviene schiarar: dicer convienti
24  chi drizzò l'arco tuo a tal berzaglio.”

25  And I: "By philosophic arguments,
26  And by authority that hence descends,
27  Such love must needs imprint itself in me;

25  E io: “Per filosofici argomenti
26  e per autorità che quinci scende
27  cotale amor convien che in me si 'mprenti:

28  For Good, so far as good, when comprehended
29  Doth straight enkindle love, and so much greater
30  As more of goodness in itself it holds;

28  ché 'l bene, in quanto ben, come s'intende,
29  così accende amore, e tanto maggio
30  quanto più di bontate in sé comprende.

31  Then to that Essence (whose is such advantage
32  That every good which out of it is found
33  Is nothing but a ray of its own light)

31  Dunque a l'essenza ov' è tanto avvantaggio,
32 che ciascun ben che fuor di lei si trova
33 altro non è ch'un lume di suo raggio,

34  More than elsewhither must the mind be moved
35  Of every one, in loving, who discerns
36  The truth in which this evidence is founded.

34  più che in altra convien che si mova
35  la mente, amando, di ciascun che cerne
36  il vero in che si fonda questa prova.

37  Such truth he to my intellect reveals
38  Who demonstrates to me the primal love
39  Of all the sempiternal substances.

37  Tal vero a l'intelletto mïo sterne
38  colui che mi dimostra il primo amore
39  di tutte le sustanze sempiterne.

40  The voice reveals it of the truthful Author,
41  Who says to Moses, speaking of Himself,
42  'I will make all my goodness pass before thee.'

40  Sternel la voce del verace autore,
41  che dice a Moïsè, di sé parlando:
42  'Io ti farò vedere ogne valore.'

43  Thou too revealest it to me, beginning
44  The loud Evangel, that proclaims the secret
45  Of heaven to earth above all other edict."

43  Sternilmi tu ancora, incominciando
44  l'alto preconio che grida l'arcano
45  di qui là giù sovra ogne altro bando.”

46  And I heard say: "By human intellect
47  And by authority concordant with it,
48  Of all thy loves reserve for God the highest.

46  E io udi': “Per intelletto umano
47  e per autoritadi a lui concorde
48  d'i tuoi amori a Dio guarda il sovrano.

49  But say again if other cords thou feelest,
50  Draw thee towards Him, that thou mayst proclaim
51  With how many teeth this love is biting thee."

49  Ma dì ancor se tu senti altre corde
50  tirarti verso lui, sì che tu suone
51  con quanti denti questo amor ti morde.”

52  The holy purpose of the Eagle of Christ
53  Not latent was, nay, rather I perceived
54  Whither he fain would my profession lead.

52  Non fu latente la santa intenzione
53  de l'aguglia di Cristo, anzi m'accorsi
54  dove volea menar mia professione.

55  Therefore I recommenced: "All of those bites
56  Which have the power to turn the heart to God
57  Unto my charity have been concurrent.

55  Però ricominciai: “Tutti quei morsi
56  che posson far lo cor volgere a Dio,
57  a la mia caritate son concorsi:

58  The being of the world, and my own being,
59  The death which He endured that I may live,
60  And that which all the faithful hope, as I do

58  ché l'essere del mondo e l'esser mio,
59  la morte ch'el sostenne perch' io viva,
60  e quel che spera ogne fedel com' io,

61  With the forementioned vivid consciousness
62  Have drawn me from the sea of love perverse,
63  And of the right have placed me on the shore.

61  con la predetta conoscenza viva,
62  tratto m'hanno del mar de l'amor torto,
63  e del diritto m'han posto a la riva.

64  The leaves, wherewith embowered is all the garden
65  Of the Eternal Gardener, do I love
66  As much as he has granted them of good."

64  Le fronde onde s'infronda tutto l'orto
65  de l'ortolano etterno, am' io cotanto
66  quanto da lui a lor di bene è porto.”

67  As soon as I had ceased, a song most sweet
68  Throughout the heaven resounded, and my Lady
69  Said with the others, "Holy, holy, holy!"

67  Sì com' io tacqui, un dolcissimo canto
68  risonò per lo cielo, e la mia donna
69  dicea con li altri: “Santo, santo, santo!”

70  And as at some keen light one wakes from sleep
71  By reason of the visual spirit that runs
72  Unto the splendour passed from coat to coat,

70  E come a lume acuto si disonna
71  per lo spirto visivo che ricorre
72  a lo splendor che va di gonna in gonna,

73  And he who wakes abhorreth what he sees,
74  So all unconscious is his sudden waking,
75  Until the judgment cometh to his aid,

73  e lo svegliato ciò che vede aborre,
74  sì nescïa è la sùbita vigilia
75  fin che la stimativa non soccorre;
76  So from before mine eyes did Beatrice
77  Chase every mote with radiance of her own,
78  That cast its light a thousand miles and more.

76  così de li occhi miei ogne quisquilia
77  fugò Beatrice col raggio d'i suoi,
78  che rifulgea da più di mille milia:

79  Whence better after than before I saw,
80  And in a kind of wonderment I asked
81  About a fourth light that I saw with us.

79  onde mei che dinanzi vidi poi;
80  e quasi stupefatto domandai
81  d'un quarto lume ch'io vidi tra noi.

82  And said my Lady: "There within those rays
83  Gazes upon its Maker the first soul
84  That ever the first virtue did create."

82  E la mia donna: “Dentro da quei rai
83  vagheggia il suo fattor l'anima prima
84  che la prima virtù creasse mai.”

85  Even as the bough that downward bends its top
86  At transit of the wind, and then is lifted
87  By its own virtue, which inclines it upward,

85  Come la fronda che flette la cima
86  nel transito del vento, e poi si leva
87  per la propria virtù che la soblima,

88  Likewise did I, the while that she was speaking,
89  Being amazed, and then I was made bold
90  By a desire to speak wherewith I burned.

88  fec'io in tanto in quant' ella diceva,
89  stupendo, e poi mi rifece sicuro
90  un disio di parlare ond' ïo ardeva.

91
92
93
91  And I began: "O apple, that mature
92  Alone hast been produced, O ancient father,
93  To whom each wife is daughter and daughter-in-law,

91  E cominciai: “O pomo che maturo
92  solo prodotto fosti, o padre antico
93  a cui ciascuna sposa è figlia e nuro,

94  Devoutly as I can I supplicate thee
95  That thou wouldst speak to me; thou seest my wish;
96  And I, to hear thee quickly, speak it not."

94  divoto quanto posso a te supplìco
95  perché mi parli: tu vedi mia voglia,
96  e per udirti tosto non la dico.”

97  Sometimes an animal, when covered, struggles
98  So that his impulse needs must be apparent,
99  By reason of the wrappage following it;

97  Talvolta un animal coverto broglia,
98  sì che l'affetto convien che si paia
98  per lo seguir che face a lui la 'nvoglia;

100  And in like manner the primeval soul
101  Made clear to me athwart its covering
102  How jubilant it was to give me pleasure.

100  e similmente l'anima primaia
101  mi facea trasparer per la coverta
102  quant' ella a compiacermi venìa gaia.

103  Then breathed: "Without thy uttering it to me,
104  Thine inclination better I discern
105  Than thou whatever thing is surest to thee;

103  Indi spirò: “Sanz' essermi proferta
104  da te, la voglia tua discerno meglio
105  che tu qualunque cosa t'è più certa;

106  For I behold it in the truthful mirror,
107  That of Himself all things parhelion makes,
108  And none makes Him parhelion of itself.

106  perch' io la veggio nel verace speglio
107  che fa di sé pareglio a l'altre cose,
108  e nulla face lui di sé pareglio.

109  Thou fain wouldst hear how long ago God placed me
110  Within the lofty garden, where this Lady
111  Unto so long a stairway thee disposed.

109  Tu vuogli udir quant' è che Dio mi puose
110  ne l'eccelso giardino, ove costei
111  a così lunga scala ti dispuose,

112  And how long to mine eyes it was a pleasure,
113  And of the great disdain the proper cause,
114  And the language that I used and that I made.

112  e quanto fu diletto a li occhi miei,
113  e la propria cagion del gran disdegno,
114  e l'idïoma ch'usai e che fei.

115  Now, son of mine, the tasting of the tree
116  Not in itself was cause of so great exile,
117  But solely the o'erstepping of the bounds.

115  Or, figliuol mio, non il gustar del legno
116  fu per sé la cagion di tanto essilio,
117  ma solamente il trapassar del segno. 

118  There, whence thy Lady moved Virgilius,
119  Four thousand and three hundred and two circuits
120  Made by the sun, this Council I desired;

118  Quindi onde mosse tua donna Virgilio,
119  quattromilia trecento e due volumi
120  di sol desiderai questo concilio;

121  And him I saw return to all the lights
122  Of his highway nine hundred times and thirty,
123  Whilst I upon the earth was tarrying.

121  e vidi lui tornare a tutt' i lumi
122  de la sua strada novecento trenta
123  fïate, mentre ch'ïo in terra fu'mi.

124  The language that I spake was quite extinct
125  Before that in the work interminable
126  The people under Nimrod were employed;

124  La lingua ch'io parlai fu tutta spenta
125  innanzi che a l'ovra inconsummabile
126  fosse la gente di Nembròt attenta:

127  For nevermore result of reasoning
128  (Because of human pleasure that doth change,
129  Obedient to the heavens) was durable.

127  ché nullo effetto mai razïonabile,
128  per lo piacere uman che rinovella
129  seguendo il cielo, sempre fu durabile.

130  A natural action is it that man speaks;
131  But whether thus or thus, doth nature leave
132  To your own art, as seemeth best to you.

130  Opera naturale è ch'uom favella;
131  ma così o così, natura lascia
132  poi fare a voi secondo che v'abbella. 

133  Ere I descended to the infernal anguish,
134  'El' was on earth the name of the Chief Good,
135  From whom comes all the joy that wraps me round

133  Pria ch'i' scendessi a l'infernale ambascia,
134  I s'appellava in terra il sommo bene
135  onde vien la letizia che mi fascia;

136  'Eli' he then was called, and that is proper,
137  Because the use of men is like a leaf
148  On bough, which goeth and another cometh.

136  e El si chiamò poi: e ciò convene,
137  ché l'uso d'i mortali è come fronda
138  in ramo, che sen va e altra vene.

139  Upon the mount that highest o'er the wave
140  Rises was I, in life or pure or sinful,
141  From the first hour to that which is the second,

139  Nel monte che si leva più da l'onda,
140  fu'io, con vita pura e disonesta,
141  da la prim' ora a quella che seconda,

142  As the sun changes quadrant, to the sixth."

142  come 'l sol muta quadra, l'ora sesta.”

Canto XXVII
Years ago, I had a friend whose mother was a closet devotee of a certain television fire and brimstone evangelical.  For her it was like a shameful addiction, like watching snuff-video porn.  She tried to quit, told friends and family, that she had quit, and overtly converted to the milder forms of the dearly belovèd sects of Christianity.  But always she would go back to her secret love.  When I asked my friend why his mother would do such a thing, he said, "She cannot give up the pleasures of Hell."  Punishment, retribution, the violent righting of perceived wrongs, these themes persist in Dante, and for the reader, as we proceed with him into these higher and higher domains of Paradise, the contrast between the love and bliss of apotheosis and the continued dark rumblings of damnation and punishment, become ... well ... become more and more ironic.  It may be that even so fine a mind as Dante's is incurably addicted to a Medieval idea of punishment, and that the taint of crime cannot be forgiven, until the scales of justice are balanced by inflicting an equal amount of pain on the perpetrators of pain.  Jehovah is not Jesus, and there will be no 70 times 70 forgivenesses of sin or turning of the other cheek.  And the Jesus who stood silent before Pilate is hardly the Jesus of Revelation.  We keep going back to the dark because in spite of our outward need to show that we are not like that, we are indeed like that, and we like it.  It may be too, that the Commedia's Medieval mania for punishment is an ineradicable part of the cosmos, which will forever infect humanity.  We cannot seem to expunge that metaphor which tells us life is war, and this field of competing violences is as much a part of the quest for peace and love as is the practice of peace and love.  To me, this is a sickening thought, which in Christianity is only placated by an imaginargy period following the Last Judgement.  To get to that imaginary place, in this trope, there must be a final paroxysm of violence that ends violence by ending the violent.  If we review the previous canto on hope, we see that hope includes the hope that our enemies may suffer and be destroyed.  The world being what the world seems to be, and we ourselves being what we seem to be, what exactly could my friend's mother experience in terms of prolonged joy and love?  And how exactly could she could begin to find as much solace in sermons of Heaven as she did in tirades threatening Hell?  Aspirations can live in the imagination, but the history of physical bodies is not lived soley in the imagination, and when push comes to shove, sickness, injustice, and violence make up a large part of actual human experience.  We know that in our 20th/ 21st century world, we are just as keen on violence and punishment as were the worst of the post-Medieval inquisitors.  Aren't the rationales for violence often conceived as a quest for justice or purity.  And doesn't retributive violence contain with in its atrocities, the momentum of joy? There is no doubt that for every reader of the Commedia who persists in their readings through the canticles depicting Purgatory and Paradise, there are 1O readers who stop with reading the Inferno, and maybe this is so for the same reasons that a lie will travel 6 times faster through the labyrinths of social media than the truth.  What revolution or revelation needs to take place in the psyche for peace and love to obliterate violence and hate?  One could almost say that violence and hate — and pain, let's not forget pain — are the fuel which propels the soul to not only search for, but to actually enjoy the bliss of Heaven.  To me, this is a scary, cynical thought.  And maybe it should be.  Maybe we really do have to be as little children, as naive about pulling the wings off flies as we are in seeking the sweetness of maternal warmth.  It has taken me much longer to read each canto of the Paradiso, than it did to get through the canti of the Purgatorio and the Inferno, and perhaps this is because these paradoxes that continue to slice through our lives as disease, aging, pain can find no permanent analgesic in stories of eternal joy and bliss, and like Saint Peter — the chameleon — in this canto, when we confront these verities in the world, we change color, and more than color, we change the very sound of our voice, and growl the threats of Hell, even while submersed in the bliss and light of Heaven.

We could see the issue of proportionality regarding time at the end of canto 26, and here that issue is examined again, not just in the context of space and time, but also regarding the proportionality of the Commedia itself.  While it's obvious that Saint Peter's prophetic denunciation looms large, emotionally, and also in the number of lines devoted to it, immediately following this, for the second time, Beatrice asks Dante to look down and review the vast distance, I would say, in terms of spirit, that he has come.  Point of view is everything, and now that the aspirant and his guide have ascended above the spheres of the fixed stars, Dante finds that his vision of space has also expanded.  We might well ask, as readers at this point, just how important are the affairs of Earth, and just how much consideration do their petty crimes and injustices merit?  In the context of Earth, they are abominations, and they are most abominable (literally this word means "against man") when those in supposed spiritual authority sink into corruption, fomenting war, fraud, and greed.  But in this place above the fixed stars, above our physical sun, they shrink, as do most objects on Earth, as we travel far into outer space, to insignificant invisibilities.  That's what happens to space, when the point of view of a person is expanded by spiritual transfiguration, they see that all those things that were so big, so important in their physical, moral, and emotional lives were in their cramping finitude as nothing compared to infinity.  But it is not only the perception of space that changes, time too changes.  This is illustrated in Canto 27 by the fact that the precession of the fixed stars through the Zodiac, which takes eons on Earth, here is accomplished in Saint Paul's twinkling of an eye.  Just as when the senses, in a spiritual experience become exponentially more acute, and we become more aware by slowing down our ordinary mind chatter, time seems to slow down, because awareness has speeded up.  The moments grow in volume, as there speed becomes inconsequential.  So at the center of this cyclone of awareness, the outer events on the wheel are seen to be whirling around one's own core stillness.

The way this canto proceeds shows us that the aspirant, and hopefully the reader too, is nearing the final stages of what could be seen as an initiation ceremony, painful and arduous at first, but becoming more and more enlightening as it approaches its final apotheosis.  One illusion after another has been experienced as if it were the only reality, and yet none of those realities had anything like an impregnable boundary line.  In the journey of the spirit, one by one, no matter how intense were our experiences in certain contexts, they are shown only to be dominant within those contexts.  As their boundaries were transcended, they are seen, at best, to be only the dumbshows of bad actors, playing their tragically ridiculous roles amidst shabby sets, and forgetting that the world they live in is only cardboard, the bodies they act in only costumes of vapor.  What happens when all those attributes by which we identified ourselves as our self, are seen through, and when space and time, the very bedrock of those attributes are seen to be changing?  That is the question we are occupied with here.  But, that is not the most important question.  The more crucial question is: What's next? 

1  "Glory be to the Father, to the Son,
2  And Holy Ghost!" all Paradise began,
3  So that the melody inebriate made me.

1  Al Padre, al Figlio, a lo Spirito Santo,
2  cominciò, “gloria!” tutto 'l paradiso,
3  sì che m'inebrïava il dolce canto.

4  What I beheld seemed unto me a smile
5  Of the universe; for my inebriation
6  Found entrance through the hearing and the sight.

4  Ciò ch'io vedeva mi sembiava un riso
5  de l'universo; per che mia ebbrezza
6  intrava per l'udire e per lo viso.

7   O joy! O gladness inexpressible!
8  O perfect life of love and peacefulness!
9  O riches without hankering secure!

7  Oh gioia! oh ineffabile allegrezza!
8  oh vita intègra d'amore e di pace!
9  oh sanza brama sicura ricchezza!

10  Before mine eyes were standing the four torches
11  Enkindled, and the one that first had come
12  Began to make itself more luminous;

10  Dinanzi a li occhi miei le quattro face
11  stavano accese, e quella che pria venne
12  incominciò a farsi più vivace,

13  And even such in semblance it became
14  As Jupiter would become, if he and Mars
15  Were birds, and they should interchange their feathers.

13  e tal ne la sembianza sua divenne,
14  qual diverrebbe Iove, s'elli e Marte
15  fossero augelli e cambiassersi penne.

16  That Providence, which here distributeth
17  Season and service, in the blessed choir
18  Had silence upon every side imposed.

16  La provedenza, che quivi comparte
17  vice e officio, nel beato coro
18  silenzio posto avea da ogne parte,

19  When I heard say: "If I my colour change,
20  Marvel not at it; for while I am speaking
21  Thou shalt behold all these their colour change.

19  quand'ïo udi': “Se io mi trascoloro,
20  non ti maravigliar, ché, dicend' io
21  vedrai trascolorar tutti costoro.

22  He who usurps upon the earth my place,
23  My place, my place, which vacant has become
24  Before the presence of the Son of God,

22  Quelli ch'usurpa in terra il luogo mio,
23  il luogo mio, il luogo mio che vaca
24  ne la presenza del Figliuol di Dio,

25  Has of my cemetery made a sewer
26  Of blood and stench, whereby the Perverse One,
27  Who fell from here, below there is appeased!"

25  fatt' ha del cimitero mio cloaca
26  del sangue e de la puzza; onde 'l perverso
27  che cadde di qua sù, là giù si placa.”

28  With the same colour which, through sun adverse,
29  Painteth the clouds at evening or at morn,
30  Beheld I then the whole of heaven suffused.

28  Di quel color che per lo sole avverso
29  nube dipigne da sera e da mane,
30  vid'ïo allora tutto 'l ciel cosperso.
 
31  And as a modest woman, who abides
32  Sure of herself, and at another's failing,
33  From listening only, timorous becomes,

31  E come donna onesta che permane
32  di sé sicura, e per l'altrui fallanza,
33  pur ascoltando, timida si fane,

34  Even thus did Beatrice change countenance;
35  And I believe in heaven was such eclipse,
36  When suffered the supreme Omnipotence;

34  così Beatrice trasmutò sembianza;
35  e tale eclissi credo che 'n ciel fue
36  quando patì la supprema possanza.

37  Thereafterward proceeded forth his words
38  With voice so much transmuted from itself,
39  The very countenance was not more changed.

37  Poi procedetter le parole sue
38  con voce tanto da sé trasmutata,
39  che la sembianza non si mutò piùe:

40  "The spouse of Christ has never nurtured been
41  On blood of mine, of Linus and of Cletus,
42  To be made use of in acquest of gold;

40  “Non fu la sposa di Cristo allevata
41  del sangue mio, di Lin, di quel di Cleto,
42  per essere ad acquisto d'oro usata;

43  But in acquest of this delightful life
44  Sixtus and Pius, Urban and Calixtus,
45  After much lamentation, shed their blood.

43  ma per acquisto d'esto viver lieto
44  e Sisto e Pïo e Calisto e Urbano
45  sparser lo sangue dopo molto fleto.

46  Our purpose was not, that on the right hand
47  Of our successors should in part be seated
48  The Christian folk, in part upon the other;

46  Non fu nostra intenzion ch'a destra mano
47  d'i nostri successor parte sedesse,
48  parte da l'altra del popol cristiano; 

49  Nor that the keys which were to me confided
50  Should e'er become the escutcheon on a banner,
51  That should wage war on those who are baptized;

49  né che le chiavi che mi fuor concesse,
50  divenisser signaculo in vessillo
51  che contra battezzati combattesse;

52  Nor I be made the figure of a seal
53  To privileges venal and mendacious,
54  Whereat I often redden and flash with fire.

52  né ch'io fossi figura di sigillo
53  a privilegi venduti e mendaci,
56  ond' io sovente arrosso e disfavillo.

55  In garb of shepherds the rapacious wolves
56  Are seen from here above o'er all the pastures!
57  O wrath of God, why dost thou slumber still?

55  In vesta di pastor lupi rapaci
56  si veggion di qua sù per tutti i paschi:
57  o difesa di Dio, perché pur giaci?

58  To drink our blood the Caorsines and Gascons
59  Are making ready. O thou good beginning,
60  Unto how vile an end must thou needs fall!

58  Del sangue nostro Caorsini e Guaschi
59  s'apparecchian di bere: o buon principio,
60  a che vil fine convien che tu caschi!

61  But the high Providence, that with Scipio
62  At Rome the glory of the world defended,
63  Will speedily bring aid, as I conceive;

61  Ma l'alta provedenza, che con Scipio
62  difese a Roma la gloria del mondo,
63  soccorrà tosto, sì com' io concipio;

64  And thou, my son, who by thy mortal weight
65  Shalt down return again, open thy mouth;
66  What I conceal not, do not thou conceal."

64  e tu, figliuol, che per lo mortal pondo
65  ancor giù tornerai, apri la bocca,
66  e non asconder quel ch'io non ascondo.”

67  As with its frozen vapours downward falls
68  In flakes our atmosphere, what time the horn
69  Of the celestial Goat doth touch the sun,

67  Si come di vapor gelati fiocca
68  in giuso l'aere nostro, quando 'l corno
69  de la capra del ciel col sol si tocca

70  Upward in such array saw I the ether
71  Become, and flaked with the triumphant vapours,
72  Which there together with us had remained.

70  in sù vid' io così l'etera addorno
71  farsi e fioccar di vapor trïunfanti
72  che fatto avien con noi quivi soggiorno.

73  My sight was following up their semblances,
74  And followed till the medium, by excess,
75  The passing farther onward took from it;

73  Lo viso mio seguiva i suoi sembianti,
74  e seguì fin che 'l mezzo, per lo molto,
75  li tolse il trapassar del più avanti.

76  Whereat the Lady, who beheld me freed
77  From gazing upward, said to me: "Cast down
78  Thy sight, and see how far thou art turned round."

76  Onde la donna, che mi vide assolto
77  de l'attendere in sù, mi disse: “Adima
78  il viso e guarda come tu se' vòlto.”

79  Since the first time that I had downward looked,
80  I saw that I had moved through the whole arc
81  Which the first climate makes from midst to end;

79  Da l'ora ch'ïo avea guardato prima
80  i' vidi mosso me per tutto l'arco
81  che fa dal mezzo al fine il primo clima;

82  So that I saw the mad track of Ulysses
83  Past Gades, and this side, well nigh the shore
84  Whereon became Europa a sweet burden.

82  sì ch'io vedea di là da Gade il varco
83  folle d'Ulisse, e di qua presso il lito
84  nel qual si fece Europa dolce carco.

84  And of this threshing-floor the site to me
85  Were more unveiled, but the sun was proceeding
86  Under my feet, a sign and more removed.

85  E più mi fora discoverto il sito
86  di questa aiuola; ma 'l sol procedea
87  sotto i mie' piedi un segno e più partito.

88  My mind enamoured, which is dallying
89  At all times with my Lady, to bring back
90  To her mine eyes was more than ever ardent.

88  La mente innamorata, che donnea
89  con la mia donna sempre, di ridure
90  ad essa li occhi più che mai ardea;

91  And if or Art or Nature has made bait
92  To catch the eyes and so possess the mind,
93  In human flesh or in its portraiture,

91  e se natura o arte fé pasture
92  da pigliare occhi, per aver la mente,
93  in carne umana o ne le sue pitture,

94  All joined together would appear as nought
95  To the divine delight which shone upon me
96  When to her smiling face I turned me round.

94  tutte adunate, parrebber nïente
95  ver' lo piacer divin che mi refulse,
96  quando mi volsi al suo viso ridente.

97  The virtue that her look endowed me with
98  From the fair nest of Leda tore me forth,
99  And up into the swiftest heaven impelled me.

97  E la virtù che lo sguardo m'indulse,
98  del bel nido di Leda mi divelse
99  e nel ciel velocissimo m'impulse.

100  Its parts exceeding full of life and lofty
101  Are all so uniform, I cannot say
102  Which Beatrice selected for my place.

100  Le parti sue vivissime ed eccelse
101  sì uniforme son, ch'i' non so dire
102  qual Bëatrice per loco mi scelse.

103  But she, who was aware of my desire,
104  Began, the while she smiled so joyously
105  That God seemed in her countenance to rejoice:

103  Ma ella, che vedia 'l mio disire,
104  incominciò, ridendo tanto lieta,
105  che Dio parea nel suo volto gioire:

106  "The nature of that motion, which keeps quiet
107  The centre and all the rest about it moves,
108  From hence begins as from its starting point.

106  “La natura del mondo, che quïeta
107  il mezzo e tutto l'altro intorno move,
108  quinci comincia come da sua meta;

109  And in this heaven there is no other Where
110  Than in the Mind Divine, wherein is kindled
111  The love that turns it, and the power it rains.

109  e questo cielo non ha altro dove
110  che la mente divina, in che s'accende
111  l'amor che 'l volge e la virtù ch'ei piove.

112  Within a circle light and love embrace it,
113  Even as this doth the others, and that precinct
114  He who encircles it alone controls.

112  Luce e amor d'un cerchio lui comprende,
113  sì come questo li altri; e quel precinto
114  colui che 'l cinge solamente intende.

115  Its motion is not by another meted,
116  But all the others measured are by this,
117  As ten is by the half and by the fifth.

115  Non è suo moto per altro distinto,
116  ma li altri son mensurati da questo,
117  sì come diece da mezzo e da quinto;

118  And in what manner time in such a pot
119  May have its roots, and in the rest its leaves,
120  Now unto thee can manifest be made.

118  e come il tempo tegna in cotal testo
119  le sue radici e ne li altri le fronde,
120  omai a te può esser manifesto.

121  O Covetousness, that mortals dost ingulf
122  Beneath thee so, that no one hath the power
123  Of drawing back his eyes from out thy waves!

121  Oh cupidigia, che i mortali affonde
122  sì sotto te, che nessuno ha podere
123  di trarre li occhi fuor de le tue onde!
 
124  Full fairly blossoms in mankind the will;
125  But the uninterrupted rain converts
126  Into abortive wildings the true plums.

124  Ben fiorisce ne li uomini il volere;
125  ma la pioggia continüa converte
126  in bozzacchioni le sosine vere.

127  Fidelity and innocence are found
128  Only in children; afterwards they both
129  Take flight or e'er the cheeks with down are covered.

127  Fede e innocenza son reperte
128  solo ne' parvoletti; poi ciascuna
129  pria fugge che le guance sian coperte.

130  One, while he prattles still, observes the fasts,
131  Who, when his tongue is loosed, forthwith devours
132  Whatever food under whatever moon;

130  Tale, balbuzïendo ancor, digiuna,
131  che poi divora, con la lingua sciolta,
132  qualunque cibo per qualunque luna;

133  Another, while he prattles, loves and listens
134  Unto his mother, who when speech is perfect
135  Forthwith desires to see her in her grave.

133  e tal, balbuzïendo, ama e ascolta
134  la madre sua, che, con loquela intera,
135  disïa poi di vederla sepolta.

136  Even thus is swarthy made the skin so white
137  In its first aspect of the daughter fair
138  Of him who brings the morn, and leaves the night.

136  Così si fa la pelle bianca nera
137  nel primo aspetto de la bella figlia
138  di quel ch'apporta mane e lascia sera.

139  Thou, that it may not be a marvel to thee,
140  Think that on earth there is no one who governs;
141  Whence goes astray the human family.

139  Tu, perché non ti facci maraviglia,
140  pensa che 'n terra non è chi governi;
141  onde sì svïa l'umana famiglia.

142  Ere January be unwintered wholly
143  By the centesimal on earth neglected,
144  Shall these supernal circles roar so loud

142  Ma prima che gennaio tutto si sverni
143  per la centesma ch'è là giù negletta,
144  raggeran sì questi cerchi superni,

145  The tempest that has been so long awaited
146  Shall whirl the poops about where are the prows;
147  So that the fleet shall run its course direct,

145  che la fortuna che tanto s'aspetta,
146  le poppe volgerà u' son le prore,
147  sì che la classe correrà diretta;

148  And the true fruit shall follow on the flower."

148  e vero frutto verrà dopo 'l fiore.”

Canto XXVIII
Any novice writer who has swallowed the prohibition against mixed metaphors, needs to ponder the masterful way that Dante has juxtaposed and interwoven the variety of metaphors that he employs in this canto.  Yes, he has been doing this throughout the Commedia, but perhaps here, as much or more as in any canto before, he delights in directing the readers mind in trope after trope, image after image, so that true to the theme of the canto, it seems to the attentive reader that his brain has been stimulated in so many different places, that his mind lights up, just as does the protagonist-Dante's in this splendid canto.  This lighting up of the mind or the soul is what Dante calls "seeing," or better "vision," and he makes so bold here to say that this type of seeing is the progenitor of love, and not the other way around.  Generally speaking we define light with contrasting shadows, here Dante does not do that, but rather he defines different qualities of light in comparison to others, so that the mind of the reader is left dazzled.  And yet that dazzle is in effect made tolerable to the mind and eyes, instead of blinding them, by his switching back and forth to those many metaphors he employs, many of which refer to experiences that we might have in everyday life.  The double candled lamp seen in a mirror, the eyes of Beatrice, a swiftly revolving sphere whose brightest highlight, like the eye of God, attracts all gazes, a star which would dwarf in the night the light of the moon, halos, rings of fire, speeds speeding ever faster, fingers plied to a knot, the mind needing, like a body, to be fed, skies cleared by soft breezes, smelting iron shooting out fiery sparks, puzzled thoughts, and the puzzle of doubling numbers in the 64 squares that constitute the geography of a chess board, blossoms in spring, astrological signs, and of course those recurring number motifs of threes and nines.  It would be a mistake for the modern reader to think this ordering of angels is but a bit or archaic jugglery, too arcane to merit our attention.  We need only remember that these angelic orders are each one indicative of an area of study or knowledge as presented in the Trivium (grammar, rhetoric, logic), and Quadrivium (arithmetic, astronomy, geometry, and music), whose combined curriculums constitute the complete source of knowledge, which any scholar of the period, or any scholar now, might pursue in a lifetime of study, comparing how these orders of realities relate to the acquisition of knowledge and the perfecting of the mind.  But essentially we find that all of these interwoven entities are here "seen" as when an advanced meditator sees the blue light of the so-called third eye, pierced by a star, and centered as Dante relates here in the forehead.  After looking at a bright light, and closing one's eyes, a light, appears — usually red, but sometimes neon green or blue, with these colors circling one another.  These are called entoptic phenomena, and are the result of the optic nerve being stimulated when the eyelids are closed and no external light enters.  Archeologists hypothesize that a great many shapes carved into those petroglyphs found throughout the world are the result of these internal visions.  Whatever is in there, in terms of knowledge, generally dazzles the psychonaut, and has about it such a shocking and numinous quality that these voyages into the deeper areas of consciousness strike the one who experiences them as hyper-real, revelations with a cosmological aspect, which seem to be interconnected, and yet still divided into phases of creativity, which are coincident here with the order of divine entities circling around the light of God.  These phases become apparent to any artist who penetrates deeply enough into his craft — craft here taken to mean a mastery of unseen power, as Masons refer to their rites as the craft.  These phenomena are not only seen, but made use of.  This is what Dante is revealing about his own mastery, a mastery that is two-fold: aesthetic and spiritual.  This is a more primeval way of looking at poetry.  In primeval cultures art, healing, and spirituality are all one thing, whereas we have divided them — I think to our peril — into entertainment, medical science, and religion.  If this is so, then we are the fragmented degenerate epigone of peoples who knew more about living harmoniously on this physical plane and beyond, than we now do — which may be the cause of all the angst and violence that we suffer trying to find a meaningful joyous life in the absence of any essential unity.  The one thing, the one obsession, we may call it, of Dante, the poet, is to create a unified form from the worst to the blessed, and as we come to the close of the Commedia, his formalization of cosmological insights have acquired a deeper and vaster sweep.  I would add one more thing to this.  Why should we bother with this craft which seems no more than the exposition of Medieval theology.  The terms Dante uses are long out of fashion for us, and we are apt to view them as obsolete, and therefore, inconsequential.  But I think that what the reader  — in this or in any age — is called upon to learn is a certain type of metaskill, that is, the art and craft of cross-context learning.  We are being gifted here a methodology to achieve not only mastery but transcendence, and yet the idiom by which this methodology is expressed is alien to us.  To make these insights, our own insight, we must be able to lift them out of the context of 14th century Italy, and by certain operations, permutate that idiom so that it becomes pertinent to where we are now and to what we need to experience and know in order to repair our own fragmented and violent inner lives and social and political disjunctions.  We must study, and learn, but study cannot be only that of academic footnotes.  Our study must be made by means of linking our consciousness with that of an internal Dante, to see our world as Dante saw his, by means of adopting his masterful way of seeing, and by that means translating his idiom into our own.  Dante learned something in the decades he spent writing his poem, and what he learned and, more crucially, how he learned, is encoded in the poem.  For more than eight centuries that code has stood the test of time, and of the radical changes of worldviews and cultures, which have ensued.  To decipher that code in our own here and now is the task of each reader, and if we look deeply enough into ourselves and into the poem, that code can be read and made to create our own guidance system through the troubling baffles of our own chaotic times. 

1  After the truth against the present life
2  Of miserable mortals was unfolded
3  By her who doth imparadise my mind,

1  Poscia che 'ncontro a la vita presente
2  d'i miseri mortali aperse 'l vero
3  quella che 'mparadisa la mia mente,

4  As in a looking-glass a taper's flame
5  He sees who from behind is lighted by it,
6  Before he has it in his sight or thought,

4  come in lo specchio fiamma di doppiero
5  vede colui che se n'alluma retro,
6  prima che l'abbia in vista o in pensiero,

7  And turns him round to see if so the glass
8  Tell him the truth, and sees that it accords
9  Therewith as doth a music with its metre,

7  e sé rivolge per veder se 'l vetro
8  li dice il vero, e vede ch'el s'accorda
9  con esso come nota con suo metro;

10  In similar wise my memory recollecteth
11  That I did, looking into those fair eyes,
12  Of which Love made the springes to ensnare me.

10  così la mia memoria si ricorda
11  ch'io feci riguardando ne' belli occhi
12  onde a pigliarmi fece Amor la corda.

13  And as I turned me round, and mine were touched
14  By that which is apparent in that volume,
15  Whenever on its gyre we gaze intent,

13  E com' io mi rivolsi e furon tocchi
14  li miei da ciò che pare in quel volume,
15  quandunque nel suo giro ben s'adocchi,

16  A point beheld I, that was raying out
17  Light so acute, the sight which it enkindles
18  Must close perforce before such great acuteness.

16  un punto vidi che raggiava lume
17  acuto sì, che 'l viso ch'elli affoca
18  chiuder conviensi per lo forte acume;

19  And whatsoever star seems smallest here
20  Would seem to be a moon, if placed beside it.
21  As one star with another star is placed.

19  e quale stella par quinci più poca,
20  parrebbe luna, locata con esso
21  come stella con stella si collòca.

22  Perhaps at such a distance as appears
23  A halo cincturing the light that paints it,
24  When densest is the vapour that sustains it,

22  Forse cotanto quanto pare appresso
23  alo cigner la luce che 'l dipigne
24  quando 'l vapor che 'l porta più è spesso,

25  Thus distant round the point a circle of fire
26  So swiftly whirled, that it would have surpassed
27  Whatever motion soonest girds the world;

25  distante intorno al punto un cerchio d'igne
26  si girava sì ratto, ch'avria vinto
27  quel moto che più tosto il mondo cigne;

28  And this was by another circumcinct,
29  That by a third, the third then by a fourth,
30  By a fifth the fourth, and then by a sixth the fifth;

28  e questo era d'un altro circumcinto,
29  e quel dal terzo, e 'l terzo poi dal quarto,
30  dal quinto il quarto, e poi dal sesto il quinto.

31  The seventh followed thereupon in width
32  So ample now, that Juno's messenger
33  Entire would be too narrow to contain it.

31  Sopra seguiva il settimo sì sparto
32  già di larghezza, che 'l messo di Iuno
33  intero a contenerlo sarebbe arto.

34  Even so the eighth and ninth; and every one
35  More slowly moved, according as it was
36  In number distant farther from the first.

34  Così l'ottavo e 'l nono; e ciascheduno
35  più tardo si movea, secondo ch'era
36  in numero distante più da l'uno;

37  And that one had its flame most crystalline
38  From which less distant was the stainless spark,
39  I think because more with its truth imbued.

37  e quello avea la fiamma più sincera
38  cui men distava la favilla pura,
39  credo, però che più di lei s'invera.

40  My Lady, who in my anxiety
41  Beheld me much perplexed, said: "From that point
42  Dependent is the heaven and nature all.

40  La donna mia, che mi vedëa in cura
41  forte sospeso, disse: “Da quel punto
42  depende il cielo e tutta la natura.

43  Behold that circle most conjoined to it,
44  And know thou, that its motion is so swift
45  Through burning love whereby it is spurred on."

43  Mira quel cerchio che più li è congiunto;
44 e sappi che 'l suo muovere è sì tosto
45  per l'affocato amore ond' elli è punto.”

46  And I to her: "If the world were arranged
47  In the order which I see in yonder wheels,
48  What's set before me would have satisfied me;

46  E io a lei: “Se 'l mondo fosse posto
47  con l'ordine ch'io veggio in quelle rote,
48  sazio m'avrebbe ciò che m'è proposto;

49  But in the world of sense we can perceive
50  That evermore the circles are diviner
51  As they are from the centre more remote

49  ma nel mondo sensibile si puote
50  veder le volte tanto più divine,
51  quant' elle son dal centro più remote. 

52  Wherefore if my desire is to be ended
53  In this miraculous and angelic temple,
54  That has for confines only love and light,

52  Onde, se 'l mio disir dee aver fine
53  in questo miro e angelico templo
54  che solo amore e luce ha per confine,
55  To hear behoves me still how the example
56  And the exemplar go not in one fashion,
57  Since for myself in vain I contemplate it."

55  udir convienmi ancor come l'essemplo
56  e l'essemplare non vanno d'un modo,
57  ché io per me indarno a ciò contemplo.” 

58  "If thine own fingers unto such a knot
59  Be insufficient, it is no great wonder,
60  So hard hath it become for want of trying."

58  “Se li tuoi diti non sono a tal nodo
59  sufficïenti, non è maraviglia:
60  tanto, per non tentare, è fatto sodo!”

61  My Lady thus; then said she: "Do thou take
62  What I shall tell thee, if thou wouldst be sated,
63  And exercise on that thy subtlety.

61  Così la donna mia; poi disse: “Piglia
62 quel ch'io ti dicerò, se vuo' saziarti;
63 e intorno da esso t'assottiglia.

64  The circles corporal are wide and narrow
65  According to the more or less of virtue
66  Which is distributed through all their parts.

64  Li cerchi corporai sono ampi e arti
65  secondo il più e 'l men de la virtute
66  che si distende per tutte lor parti. 

67  The greater goodness works the greater weal,
68  The greater weal the greater body holds,
69  If perfect equally are all its parts.

67  Maggior bontà vuol far maggior salute;
68  maggior salute maggior corpo cape,
69  s'elli ha le parti igualmente compiute.

70  Therefore this one which sweeps along with it
71  The universe sublime, doth correspond
72  Unto the circle which most loves and knows.

70  Dunque costui che tutto quanto rape
71  l'altro universo seco, corrisponde
72  al cerchio che più ama e che più sape:

73  On which account, if thou unto the virtue
74  Apply thy measure, not to the appearance
75  Of substances that unto thee seem round,

73  per che, se tu a la virtù circonde
74  la tua misura, non a la parvenza
75  de le sustanze che t'appaion tonde,

76  Thou wilt behold a marvellous agreement,
77  Of more to greater, and of less to smaller,
78  In every heaven, with its Intelligence."

76  tu vederai mirabil consequenza
77  di maggio a più e di minore a meno,
78  in ciascun cielo, a sua intelligenza.”

79  Even as remaineth splendid and serene
80  The hemisphere of air, when Boreas
81  Is blowing from that cheek where he is mildest,

79  Come rimane splendido e sereno
80  l'emisperio de l'aere, quando soffia
81  Borea da quella guancia ond' è più leno,

82  Because is purified and resolved the rack
83  That erst disturbed it, till the welkin laughs
84  With all the beauties of its pageantry;

82  per che si purga e risolve la roffia
83  che pria turbava, sì che 'l ciel ne ride
84  con le bellezze d'ogne sua paroffia;

85  Thus did I likewise, after that my Lady
86  Had me provided with her clear response,
87  And like a star in heaven the truth was seen.

85  così fec'ïo, poi che mi provide
86  la donna mia del suo risponder chiaro,
87  e come stella in cielo il ver si vide.

88  And soon as to a stop her words had come,
89  Not otherwise does iron scintillate
90  When molten, than those circles scintillated.

88  E poi che le parole sue restaro,
89  non altrimenti ferro disfavilla
90  che bolle, come i cerchi sfavillaro.

91  Their coruscation all the sparks repeated,
92  And they so many were, their number makes
93  More millions than the doubling of the chess.

91  L'incendio suo seguiva ogne scintilla;
92  ed eran tante, che 'l numero loro
93  più che 'l doppiar de li scacchi s'inmilla.

94  I heard them sing hosanna choir by choir
95  To the fixed point which holds them at the 'Ubi,'
96  And ever will, where they have ever been.

94  Io sentiva osannar di coro in coro
95  al punto fisso che li tiene a li ubi,
96  e terrà sempre, ne' quai sempre fuoro.

97  And she, who saw the dubious meditations
98  Within my mind, "The primal circles," said,
99  "Have shown thee Seraphim and Cherubim.

97  E quella che vedëa i pensier dubi
98  ne la mia mente, disse: “I cerchi primi
99  t'hanno mostrato Serafi e Cherubi.

100  Thus rapidly they follow their own bonds,
101  To be as like the point as most they can,
102  And can as far as they are high in vision.

100  Così veloci seguono i suoi vimi,
102  per somigliarsi al punto quanto ponno;
103  e posson quanto a veder son soblimi.

103  Those other Loves, that round about them go,
104  Thrones of the countenance divine are called,
105  Because they terminate the primal Triad.

103  Quelli altri amori che 'ntorno li vonno,
104  si chiaman Troni del divino aspetto,
105  per che 'l primo ternaro terminonno;

106  And thou shouldst know that they all have delight
107  As much as their own vision penetrates
108  The Truth, in which all intellect finds rest.

106  e dei saper che tutti hanno diletto
107  quanto la sua veduta si profonda
108  nel vero in che si queta ogne intelletto.

109  From this it may be seen how blessedness
110  Is founded in the faculty which sees,
111  And not in that which loves, and follows next;

109  Quinci si può veder come si fonda
110  l'esser beato ne l'atto che vede,
111  non in quel ch'ama, che poscia seconda;

112  And of this seeing merit is the measure,
113  Which is brought forth by grace, and by good will;
114  Thus on from grade to grade doth it proceed.

112  e del vedere è misura mercede,
113  che grazia partorisce e buona voglia:
114  così di grado in grado si procede.

115  The second Triad, which is germinating
116  In such wise in this sempiternal spring,
117  That no nocturnal Aries despoils,

115  L'altro ternaro, che così germoglia
116  in questa primavera sempiterna
117  che notturno Arïete non dispoglia,

118  Perpetually hosanna warbles forth
119  With threefold melody, that sounds in three
120  Orders of joy, with which it is intrined.

118  perpetüalemente 'Osanna' sberna
119  con tre melode, che suonano in tree
120  ordini di letizia onde s'interna.

121  The three Divine are in this hierarchy,
122  First the Dominions, and the Virtues next;
123  And the third order is that of the Powers.

121  In essa gerarcia son l'altre dee:
122  prima Dominazioni, e poi Virtudi;
123  l'ordine terzo di Podestadi èe.

124  Then in the dances twain penultimate
125  The Principalities and Archangels wheel;
126  The last is wholly of angelic sports.

124  Poscia ne' due penultimi tripudi
125  Principati e Arcangeli si girano;
126  l'ultimo è tutto d'Angelici ludi. 

127  These orders upward all of them are gazing,
128  And downward so prevail, that unto God
129  They all attracted are and all attract.

127 Questi ordini di sù tutti s'ammirano,
128  e di giù vincon sì, che verso Dio
129  tutti tirati sono e tutti tirano.

130  And Dionysius with so great desire
131  To contemplate these Orders set himself,
132  He named them and distinguished them as I do.

130  E Dïonisio con tanto disio
131  a contemplar questi ordini si mise,
132  che li nomò e distinse com' io.

133  But Gregory afterwards dissented from him;
134  Wherefore, as soon as he unclosed his eyes
135  Within this heaven, he at himself did smile.

133  Ma Gregorio da lui poi si divise;
134  onde, sì tosto come li occhi aperse
135  in questo ciel, di sé medesmo rise.

136  And if so much of secret truth a mortal
137  Proffered on earth, I would not have thee marvel,
138  For he who saw it here revealed it to him,

136  E se tanto secreto ver proferse
137  mortale in terra, non voglio ch'ammiri:
138  ché chi 'l vide qua sù gliel discoperse

139  With much more of the truth about these circles."

139  con altro assai del ver di questi giri.”

Canto XXIX
What is a moment?  In temporal linguistic terms it is too infinitesimally small to measure, but in the first terzets of this canto, Dante does not measure, but rather maps a moment.  Aries, the Ram, a symbol of oppositional conflict, and Libra, the balanced scales of Justice, respectively indicate the spring equinox and the autumn one.  Between these two are the pivot points of the two solstices, summer and winter.  For Dante, time is a position, which one determines by looking up, up, up to the heavens, which is where we are now, passing even above the highest of heavens to the Empyrean.  The condensation of meanings converging around this flash of a smile from Beatrice is remarkable, and Dante's method of poetizing, which he has been training his readers — should I say his "devotees?" — to experience, now for 95 cantos, succinctly states that every moment of time, no matter how infinitesimal is an encapsulation of the whole of time.  And what better way to demonstrate how eternity differs from the seeming sequential nature of historical, mortal time, than through this metaphor of complete balance, each moment eternal in the sense that it is a holographic image of something infinite, not because it is on an infinite, serpentine line, whose beginning and ending are unknown, but because it is a kind of pulsating sphere whose circumference follows the movement of an infinite number of still points around whose centers it revolves — all this in the first three terzets.  (Three times three, that is, the nine, the mystic number, because, for one among other reasons, Dante met Beatrice when they were nine years old, his first glance being that which pierced him with the love that set him on his course and centered him through his whole nomadic life of exile.)  I defy anyone to consider the moment in which they perceive each one of these words as they are passing through the mind, to really imagine time like this as they read, and not be overwhelmed by the experience.  This condition of being overwhelmed, is a trope that occurs again and again throughout the Commedia, and especially, but for different reasons, in the Inferno, and here, in the Paradiso.  Where are we on that map of time?  Between the ubi (the where) and the quando (the when).  Dante uses some Latin terms here, I think to emphasize that all of this is framed as a poetic/linguistic event.  I am reminded of a quote from David Lewis-Williams' book, The Mind in the Cave, in which he says that what differentiated Neanderthals from modern humans, and caused Homo sapiens to win out, was not intelligence per se, but a certain kind of intelligence, which enabled them to remember, symbolize, and mythologize altered states of awareness.  He says that without these types of linguistic markers that can delineate the past and the future, and I would add here, hold them together in the simultaneity of a single act of awareness, "there can be no gods."  Thus Saint John says: "In the beginning was the word."  And what is it that happens here between the where and the when?  The Muse, the inspiration bestowed by Love, begins her dictation: she tells, she does not ask.  I think here of Julian Jaynes' The Origin of Consciousness and the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind.  Wherein Jaynes hypothesizes that the voice which originated from the holistic side of the brain, was heard as the voice of the Divine other, and this voice determined the actions of every person.  Jaynes thought that once the opposite sequential side of the brain became dominant, that is to say, "reason," the holoistic side's voice was understood to be one's own voice, no longer Divine, and no longer irresistibly dictatorial.  His theory implies that every human being, in this archaic situation, is a kind of schizophrenic controlled by audio hallucinations.  Dante, if he had heard this theory, would have said Jaynes is right in all particulars, but wrong in his conclusion; that in fact, Jaynes had it exactly backwards, that the fall of man is due to the fact that his actions are corrupted by this very movement from divine reason (for Dante exalts Reason as being sourced in the Divine) to human self-centered logic.  Everything is turned around in that moment in which humans imagine that their own appetites and ambitions are the sole motivations for action.  Thus, again and again, the Commedia juxtaposes the consequences obtaining from these two positions, and Dante never hesitates to assert that the saved, the saints, are devoted to the former, and the damned are addicted to the latter.  For Dante, as he has the voice of Beatrice tell us, the joy of salvation is a glory derived from this divine point, whence comes the voice which says: Exist.  And when we are at this point we reflect on the infinite goodness imbodied by the Word.  Here too the verses tell us that given this form of eternity, it is a mistake to speculate on the before and after.  Where could they possibly be in this sphere whose center is everywhere and circumference nowhere?  To think in this realm of befores and afters is serpent thinking, and this reminds me of Blake's trope, that man is a worm, seventy inches long.  (Inches means years.) What follows here, in Canto 29, are metaphors of light and shining.  And even though now we have measured the speed of photons, it is still impossible to separate light from the quality of light that shines.  So too we are the shinings of the ultimate light of this cosmos, not just the photons, but their ineradicable effect.  Grace comes automatically with the realization that the false, dark chaos of the insatiable ego's appetites and ambitions was simply the result of the pride of that worm seventy inches long imagining that it is slithering somewhere where it is not on the path of suffering and death.  Eliminate that adder's puffing, and grace pours in, as it has into all the Saints now visible to Dante in this canto.  One receives this joy as one's heart humbly inclines to it.  What makes an angel?  The unceasing awareness of this truth's light.  They cannot, as Beatrice tells Dante, even for a single instant, look away.  To be other than in this state of grace is, in Beatrice's words, to dream that you are awake.  Oppossed to this, in the earthly "fallen," are all the spectacle of falsehood, all the shows with no true shine, and these are preached to the gullible for the amusing diversion that we now call entertainment, mere momentary tittilations, which must be repeated again and again, lest one fall into the utter alienation of boredom, that depressing state, which always follows when one tires of the show, or when one sees behind the curtain or the screen into the voids of the utterly trivial.  The canto concludes with the trope of the true light shining amidst myriads of mirrors.  Although this light appears to be many, and 'though any one of these reflections might dull or the mirrors break, no accident, no change, no addition or subtraction of reflective surfaces can in any way affect this slendor.

1  At what time both the children of Latona,
2  Surmounted by the Ram and by the Scales,
3  Together make a zone of the horizon,

1  Quando ambedue li figli di Latona,
2  coperti del Montone e de la Libra,
3  fanno de l'orizzonte insieme zona,

4  As long as from the time the zenith holds them
5  In equipoise, till from that girdle both
6  Changing their hemisphere disturb the balance,

4  quant' è dal punto che 'l cenìt inlibra
5  infin che l'uno e l'altro da quel cinto,
6  cambiando l'emisperio, si dilibra,

7  So long, her face depicted with a smile,
8  Did Beatrice keep silence while she gazed
9  Fixedly at the point which had o'ercome me.

7  tanto, col volto di riso dipinto,
8  si tacque Bëatrice, riguardando
9  fiso nel punto che m'avëa vinto.

10  Then she began: "I say, and I ask not
11  What thou dost wish to hear, for I have seen it
12  Where centres every When and every 'Ubi.'

10  Poi cominciò: “Io dico, e non dimando,
11  quel che tu vuoli udir, perch' io l'ho visto
12  là 've s'appunta ogne ubi e ogne quando.

13  Not to acquire some good unto himself,
15  Which is impossible, but that his splendour
16  In its resplendency may say, 'Subsisto,'

13  Non per aver a sé di bene acquisto,
14  ch'esser non può, ma perché suo splendore
15  potesse, risplendendo, dir 'Subsisto,'

16  In his eternity outside of time,
17  Outside all other limits, as it pleased him,
18  Into new Loves the Eternal Love unfolded.

16  in sua etternità di tempo fore,
17  fuor d'ogne altro comprender, come i piacque,
18  s'aperse in nuovi amor l'etterno amore.

19  Nor as if torpid did he lie before;
20  For neither after nor before proceeded
21  The going forth of God upon these waters.

19  Né prima quasi torpente si giacque;
20  ché né prima né poscia procedette
22  lo discorrer di Dio sovra quest' acque.

22  Matter and Form unmingled and conjoined
23  Came into being that had no defect,
24  E'en as three arrows from a three-stringed bow.

22  Forma e materia, congiunte e purette,
23  usciro ad esser che non avia fallo,
24  come d'arco tricordo tre saette.
25  And as in glass, in amber, or in crystal
26  A sunbeam flashes so, that from its coming
27  To its full being is no interval,

25  E come in vetro, in ambra o in cristallo
26  raggio resplende sì, che dal venire
27  a l'esser tutto non è intervallo,

28  So from its Lord did the triform effect
29  Ray forth into its being all together,
30  Without discrimination of beginning.

28  così 'l triforme effetto del suo sire
29  ne l'esser suo raggiò insieme tutto
30  sanza distinzïone in essordire.

31  Order was con-created and constructed
32  In substances, and summit of the world
33  Were those wherein the pure act was produced.

31  Concreato fu ordine e costrutto
32  a le sustanze; e quelle furon cima
33  nel mondo in che puro atto fu produtto;

34  Pure potentiality held the lowest part;
35  Midway bound potentiality with act
36  Such bond that it shall never be unbound.

34  pura potenza tenne la parte ima;
35  nel mezzo strinse potenza con atto
36  tal vime, che già mai non si divima.

37  Jerome has written unto you of angels
38  Created a long lapse of centuries
39  Or ever yet the other world was made;

37  Ieronimo vi scrisse lungo tratto
38  di secoli de li angeli creati
39  anzi che l'altro mondo fosse fatto;

40  But written is this truth in many places
41  By writers of the Holy Ghost, and thou
42  Shalt see it, if thou lookest well thereat.

40  ma questo vero è scritto in molti lati
41  da li scrittor de lo Spirito Santo,
42  e tu te n'avvedrai se bene agguati;

43  And even reason seeth it somewhat,
44  For it would not concede that for so long
45  Could be the motors without their perfection.

43  e anche la ragione il vede alquanto,
44  che non concederebbe che ' motori
45  sanza sua perfezion fosser cotanto. 

46  Now dost thou know both where and when these Loves
47  Created were, and how; so that extinct
48  In thy desire already are three fires.

46  Or sai tu dove e quando questi amori
47  furon creati e come: sì che spenti
48  nel tuo disïo già son tre ardori.

49  Nor could one reach, in counting, unto twenty
50  So swiftly, as a portion of these angels
51  Disturbed the subject of your elements.

49  Né giugneriesi, numerando, al venti
50  sì tosto, come de li angeli parte
52  turbò il suggetto d'i vostri alimenti.

52  The rest remained, and they began this art
53  Which thou discernest, with so great delight
54  That never from their circling do they cease.

52  L'altra rimase, e cominciò quest' arte
53  che tu discerni, con tanto diletto,
54  che mai da circüir non si diparte.

55  The occasion of the fall was the accursed
56  Presumption of that One, whom thou hast seen
57  By all the burden of the world constrained.

55  Principio del cader fu il maladetto
56  superbir di colui che tu vedesti
57  da tutti i pesi del mondo costretto.

58  Those whom thou here beholdest modest were
59  To recognise themselves as of that goodness
60  Which made them apt for so much understanding;

58  Quelli che vedi qui furon modesti
59  a riconoscer sé da la bontate
60  che li avea fatti a tanto intender presti:

61  On which account their vision was exalted
62  By the enlightening grace and their own merit,
63  So that they have a full and steadfast will.

61  per che le viste lor furo essaltate
62  con grazia illuminante e con lor merto,
63  sì c'hanno ferma e piena volontate;

64  I would not have thee doubt, but certain be,
65  'Tis meritorious to receive this grace,
66  According as the affection opens to it.

64  e non voglio che dubbi, ma sia certo,
65  che ricever la grazia è meritorio
66  secondo che l'affetto l'è aperto.

67  Now round about in this consistory
68  Much mayst thou contemplate, if these my words
69  Be gathered up, without all further aid.

67  Omai dintorno a questo consistorio
68  puoi contemplare assai, se le parole
69  mie son ricolte, sanz' altro aiutorio.

70  But since upon the earth, throughout your schools,
71  They teach that such is the angelic nature
72  That it doth hear, and recollect, and will,

70  Ma perché 'n terra per le vostre scole
71  si legge che l'angelica natura
72  è tal, che 'ntende e si ricorda e vole,

73  More will I say, that thou mayst see unmixed
74  The truth that is confounded there below,
75  Equivocating in such like prelections.

73  ancor dirò, perché tu veggi pura
74  la verità che là giù si confonde,
75  equivocando in sì fatta lettura.

76  These substances, since in God's countenance
77  They jocund were, turned not away their sight
78  From that wherefrom not anything is hidden;

76  Queste sustanze, poi che fur gioconde
77  de la faccia di Dio, non volser viso
78  da essa, da cui nulla si nasconde:

79  Hence they have not their vision intercepted
80  By object new, and hence they do not need
81  To recollect, through interrupted thought.

79  però non hanno vedere interciso
80  da novo obietto, e però non bisogna
81  rememorar per concetto diviso;

82  So that below, not sleeping, people dream,
83  Believing they speak truth, and not believing;
84  And in the last is greater sin and shame.

82  sì che la giù, non dormendo, si sogna,
83  credendo e non credendo dicer vero;
84  ma ne l'uno è più colpa e più vergogna.

85  Below you do not journey by one path
86  Philosophising; so transporteth you
87  Love of appearance and the thought thereof.

85  Voi non andate giù per un sentiero
86  filosofando: tanto vi trasporta
87  l'amor de l'apparenza e 'l suo pensiero!

88  And even this above here is endured
89  With less disdain, than when is set aside
90  The Holy Writ, or when it is distorted.

88  E ancor questo qua sù si comporta
89  con men disdegno che quando è posposta
90  la divina Scrittura o quando è torta.
91  They think not there how much of blood it costs
92  To sow it in the world, and how he pleases
93  Who in humility keeps close to it.

91  Non vi si pensa quanto sangue costa
92  seminarla nel mondo e quanto piace
93  chi umilmente con essa s'accosta.

94  Each striveth for appearance, and doth make
95  His own inventions; and these treated are
96  By preachers, and the Evangel holds its peace.

94  Per apparer ciascun s'ingegna e face
95  sue invenzioni; e quelle son trascorse
96  da' predicanti e 'l Vangelio si tace.

97  One sayeth that the moon did backward turn,
98  In the Passion of Christ, and interpose herself
99  So that the sunlight reached not down below;

97  Un dice che la luna si ritorse
98  ne la passion di Cristo e s'interpuose,
99  per che 'l lume del sol giù non si porse;

100  And lies; for of its own accord the light
101  Hid itself; whence to Spaniards and to Indians,
102  As to the Jews, did such eclipse respond.

100  e mente, ché la luce si nascose
101  da sé: però a li Spani e a l'Indi
102  come a' Giudei tale eclissi rispuose.

103  Florence has not so many Lapi and Bindi
104  As fables such as these, that every year
105  Are shouted from the pulpit back and forth,

103  Non ha Fiorenza tanti Lapi e Bindi
104  quante sì fatte favole per anno
105  in pergamo si gridan quinci e quindi:

106  In such wise that the lambs, who do not know,
107  Come back from pasture fed upon the wind,
108  And not to see the harm doth not excuse them.

106  sì che le pecorelle, che non sanno,
107  tornan del pasco pasciute di vento,
108  e non le scusa non veder lo danno.

109  Christ did not to his first disciples say,
110  'Go forth, and to the world preach idle tales,'
111  But unto them a true foundation gave;

109  Non disse Cristo al suo primo convento:
110  'Andate, e predicate al mondo ciance';
111  ma diede lor verace fondamento;

112  And this so loudly sounded from their lips,
113  That, in the warfare to enkindle Faith,
114  They made of the Evangel shields and lances.

112  e quel tanto sonò ne le sue guance,
113  sì ch'a pugnar per accender la fede
114  de l'Evangelio fero scudo e lance.

115  Now men go forth with jests and drolleries
116  To preach, and if but well the people laugh,
117  The hood puffs out, and nothing more is asked.

115  Ora si va con motti e con iscede
116  a predicare, e pur che ben si rida,
117  gonfia il cappuccio e più non si richiede.

118  But in the cowl there nestles such a bird,
119  That, if the common people were to see it,
120  They would perceive what pardons they confide in,

118  Ma tale uccel nel becchetto s'annida,
119  che se 'l vulgo il vedesse, vederebbe
120  la perdonanza di ch'el si confida:

121  For which so great on earth has grown the folly,
122  That, without proof of any testimony,
123  To each indulgence they would flock together.

121  per cui tanta stoltezza in terra crebbe,
126  che, sanza prova d'alcun testimonio,
127  ad ogne promession si correrebbe.

124  By this Saint Anthony his pig doth fatten,
125  And many others, who are worse than pigs,
126  Paying in money without mark of coinage.

124  Di questo ingrassa il porco sant' Antonio,
125  e altri assai che sono ancor più porci,
126  pagando di moneta sanza conio.

127  But since we have digressed abundantly,
128  Turn back thine eyes forthwith to the right path,
129  So that the way be shortened with the time.

127  Ma perché siam digressi assai, ritorci
128  li occhi oramai verso la dritta strada,
129  sì che la via col tempo si raccorci.

130  This nature doth so multiply itself
131  In numbers, that there never yet was speech
132  Nor mortal fancy that can go so far.

130  Questa natura sì oltre s'ingrada
131  in numero, che mai non fu loquela
132  né concetto mortal che tanto vada;

133  And if thou notest that which is revealed
134  By Daniel, thou wilt see that in his thousands
135  Number determinate is kept concealed.

133  e se tu guardi quel che si revela
134  per Danïel, vedrai che 'n sue migliaia
135  determinato numero si cela.

136  The primal light, that all irradiates it,
137  By modes as many is received therein,
137  As are the splendours wherewith it is mated.

136  La prima luce, che tutta la raia,
137  per tanti modi in essa si recepe,
138  quanti son li splendori a chi s'appaia.

139  Hence, inasmuch as on the act conceptive
140  The affection followeth, of love the sweetness
141  Therein diversely fervid is or tepid.

139  Onde, però che a l'atto che concepe
140  segue l'affetto, d'amar la dolcezza
141  diversamente in essa ferve e tepe.

142  The height behold now and the amplitude
143  Of the eternal power, since it hath made
144  Itself so many mirrors, where 'tis broken,

142  Vedi l'eccelso omai e la larghezza
143  de l'etterno valor, poscia che tanti
144  speculi fatti s'ha in che si spezza,

145  One in itself remaining as before."

145  uno manendo in sé come davanti.”

Canto XXX
If one could condense the lifespan of enumerable lives devoted to the study of this poem, down to one moment of transcendent comprehension, that would still be inadequate to complete one's understanding.  In this Canto, Beatrice calls the brilliance of this realization an "intellectual light," a light whose comprehensive luminance animates the entirety of the cosmos, and whose presence so subdues the physical eyes of any mortal being, that only the extremities of hyperbole can approach its description, and approach it solely through a perception which transcends the reach of all physical senses.  This canto begins with a convoluted and elaborate paraphrasis to mark the time — which is the hour before dawn — why?  Because, I think, Dante has come to an intellectual realization that time, like space, is everywhere all at once, and that like space, which seems subdivided by limited human perception into localities, time too appears relative, as moments and hours, days and years, but that everywhere from the brilliance of this intellectual light, the simultaneity of its true nature touches all.  Dante has reached an understanding of this phenomenon through an arithmetical calculation involving 6's, 7's and 24's, all Biblical Numbers, so that the spiritual symbolism of his calculation also corresponds to the actual movement of the sun's light across the surface the of the earth.  I have but the crudest understanding of the significance of this elaborate configuration condensed down to a few verses at the opening of this canto, because, although I can begin to make an inventory of how these verses resonate with all of their other harmonic siblings in the entirety of the Commedia, my mind quickly is dazzled into stupefaction in the midst of its retrospection.  The heart of the reader here races to the point of a heartbreak which is simultaneously stilled by an overwhelming compassion, as that which seems to be outside in the cosmos suddenly merges with the inner cosmos of one's human existence.  Words here have reached a limit, not because words are inadequate, because we must remember Saint John's proclamation that "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God."  It is only the Word which arises from the substrate of the Infinite, which tells us that the infinite exists at all, but the Word also tells us that the metaphysical and the physical both have limits as to our understanding.  This universe has a beginning, as a Big Bang, or as the Word of God, or as a single exhalation of the breath of Brahma, and so likewise it will have a heat death end.  But even knowing this, we cannot know if this single beginning and end is only part of an infinite number of cycles of beginnings and endings.  In this Canto, twice, Dante uses the metaphor of an infant searching for the breast of his or her cosmic mother, once to partake of that nourishment, and once as a negative exemplar of those souls who are offered that breast, and though starving, push it away.  In typical Dante style, this metaphor of drinking is extended to the aspirant, at Beatrice's urging, to the drinking from the divine river pictured here.  This is a river of light that is both flowing like Bergsonian time, and spherical like that famous medieval dictum, that God is a sphere whose center is everywhere and whose circumference is nowhere.  The aspirant Dante, drinks first in the linear stream, and then, nourished by that enlightenment, has the vision of the river becoming spherical.  

This Canto begins the end of the entire Commedia, because here Beatrice, who has represented one pole of a circuit the other pole of which is Dante's love, has also reached a limit.  The Canto deals with this extraordinary development in two ways.  One, in which the aspirant declares that if all the praise of Beatrice, which has to this point been the inspirational source of Dante's entire ouvre, where gathered into one effusive burst of exaltation, this praise would not even begin to express the true merit of her deserving.  The second way in which this limitation is denoted is by the simple statement that Beatrice's tone of voice is like that of a guide who has fulfilled their obligation.  What could possibly be more poignant?  And what could possibly follow this development which would save it from being tragic?  

Things now become utterly psychedelic.  As if they has not been throughout the Commedia, and especially so throughout the Paradiso.  What psychic experiences did the poet Dante, who, behind the scenes, is ordering — and I might add — supremely ordering — all this splendor.  What inner adventures have enabled him to conjure forth the miracle of his poem?  My conviction is that those experiences could only have occurred through the imaginative immersion in the act of writing the poetry itself.  In other words, the true inspiration occurring here, is the grace of the poet receiving/discovering/inventing the substance of the poem.  In the decades that Dante devoted himself to the composition of the Commedia, he learned from the poem's initial dawning what his calling was to be.  He learned from his own work as a poet how to write his poem.  He sat at the foot of his own best poet-self, as the aspirant, whose humility enabled him to be the first reader/devotee of the Commedia.  Blake says that the whole of a poet's work takes place in the space of time between a pulse and a pulse, and there must have been a moment, when Dante had reached the nadir of his own despair, a moment when the bitterness of exile dawned on him as the fate of the entire remainder of his life, a moment when he intuited that henceforth the satisfactions of home, family, social prestige and acceptance were to be permanently denied him, just in that moment, his savior, the composition of the Commedia, came to him.  In this Canto, as in the Canto of limbo where he meets the great pagan poets of the past, and is accepted into their company, here we see Dante, both abasing himself — we would say, his ego self — and elevating his calling as a poet to a position in which he, as the recipient and creator of his poem, becomes, as close as is humanly possible, one with the Creative force by which the Cosmos itself has come into existence out of a seeming background of chaotic potential.  The formula for Dante seems to have been: despair leads to humility, humility leads to inspiration, inspiration transforms despair into bliss.  

The Canto proceeds to what I might call a luminous metaphysical template, which provides the form of a physical phenomenon — that is, a river flowing between flower bedecked banks at the apogee of Spring.  The flowers here are connected to the this river of light by the emittance of sparks, which spring like divine bees from the river, nourish the flowers, and then return to the hive of their source.  What a simple image!  Bees in the flowers of Spring, beside a clear flowing river, how utterly earthy, and how utterly transcendent.  We see in this, the beginning of that single flower, the yellow rose, whose petals are the entire company of saved humans and unfallen angels, described here as soldiers, who militantly overcame the pull of that metaphysical gravity represented by Satan and the fallen angels, and of that physical gravity represented by the pull of self-indulgence, which we call vice.  

Maybe the most remarkable and puzzling thing about this Canto is how it concludes with the most important yet most debased political activities of human beings.  What an oddity it seems that Dante in this Canto, which has elevated his readers to this penultimate pinnacle of transcendence, returns them now to the quite grungy and jarring violence and corruption of 13th and 14th century Italian secular/theological politics — that old bugaboo of the Guelf and Ghibelline irreconcilable conflict.  Is Dante revealing to us that that thorn in his side, which poisoned his whole life, is not yet healed?  To me that seems a diminishment and tarnishing of the splendor of his joy.  Clearly he is still bitter about these earthly affairs.  And although he puts this condemnation into the mouth of Beatrice almost as her lover's adieu, clearly it is Dante, the poet, who still yearns to see his enemies punished.  Is Dante's vision of the cosmos one where joy sucks, along with the milk of blessedness, the poison of crime?  And do these poisoners serve as a prod to those who purify themselves only by the militant destruction of those whose road is traveled by the darkness of night and not by the light of day, of those who are the despoilers of life's joys, and whose subterfuge leads to the ultimate treason committed under the hypocritical guise of their holy offices?  If the Hindu's have their divine Destroyer as one third of their tripartite conception of the Divine, Christian Dante seems to require this conflict between the Godly and the ungodly, light still requiring darkness. Or more disturbingly, light creating the shadow of its corrupting double.  I am not Dante, and I admit that it is difficult for me to conceive of a state of bliss, which still carries within it this poison dart of bitterness.  But I am mightily impressed by Dante the poet, who has begun this Canto with the image of that shadow which races across our planet when it revolves its sunlit face into darkness, and then, by a passage through the most brilliant light, returns us here to darkness and the shadowy entities who travel, like nightmares, on the sinuous road, which leads again to despair.  Like the alchemist's infamous ouroboros, that snake which circles round to bite and perhaps even feed upon the venom of its own tail, Dante has repeated the metaphor of the line becoming a circle, and has brought the Commedia's Inferno round to infect the bliss of paradise.  If this is so, then Dante has hit upon a psychic truth centuries before Jung presented it to the modern world.  But then Jung himself discovered this truth by going backwards in time to the alchemists and inward to dreams and nightmares, that is to say, by showing that these revelations, almost like mathematical proofs, can be discovered and forgotten, again and again, but they can never be lost, because they are the constants, which sustain and evolve the life itself. 
    
1  Perchance six thousand miles remote from us
2  Is glowing the sixth hour, and now this world
3  Inclines its shadow almost to a level,

1  Forse semilia miglia di lontano
2  ci ferve l'ora sesta, e questo mondo
3  china già l'ombra quasi al letto piano,

4  When the mid-heaven begins to make itself
5  So deep to us, that here and there a star
6  Ceases to shine so far down as this depth,

4  quando 'l mezzo del cielo, a noi profondo,
5  comincia a farsi tal, ch'alcuna stella
6  perde il parere infino a questo fondo;

7  And as advances bright exceedingly
8  The handmaid of the sun, the heaven is closed
9  Light after light to the most beautiful;

7  e come vien la chiarissima ancella
8   del sol più oltre, così 'l ciel si chiude
9  di vista in vista infino a la più bella.

10  Not otherwise the Triumph, which for ever
11  Plays round about the point that vanquished me,
12  Seeming enclosed by what itself encloses,

10  Non altrimenti il trïunfo che lude
11  sempre dintorno al punto che mi vinse,
12  parendo inchiuso da quel ch'elli 'nchiude,

13  Little by little from my vision faded;
14  Whereat to turn mine eyes on Beatrice
15  My seeing nothing and my love constrained me.

13  a poco a poco al mio veder si stinse:
14  per che tornar con li occhi a Bëatrice
15  nulla vedere e amor mi costrinse. 

16  If what has hitherto been said of her
17  Were all concluded in a single praise,
18  Scant would it be to serve the present turn.

16  Se quanto infino a qui di lei si dice
17  fosse conchiuso tutto in una loda,
18  poca sarebbe a fornir questa vice.

19  Not only does the beauty I beheld
20  Transcend ourselves, but truly I believe
21  Its Maker only may enjoy it all.

19  La bellezza ch'io vidi si trasmoda
20   non pur di là da noi, ma certo io credo
21  che solo il suo fattor tutta la goda.

22  Vanquished do I confess me by this passage
23  More than by problem of his theme was ever
24  O'ercome the comic or the tragic poet;

22  Da questo passo vinto mi concedo
23  più che già mai da punto di suo tema
24  soprato fosse comico o tragedo:

25  For as the sun the sight that trembles most,
26  Even so the memory of that sweet smile
27  My mind depriveth of its very self.

25  ché, come sole in viso che più trema,
26  così lo rimembrar del dolce riso
27  la mente mia da me medesmo scema.

28  28  From the first day that I beheld her face
29  In this life, to the moment of this look,
30  The sequence of my song has ne'er been severed;

28  Dal primo giorno ch'i' vidi il suo viso
29  in questa vita, infino a questa vista,
30  non m'è il seguire al mio cantar preciso;

31  But now perforce this sequence must desist
32  From following her beauty with my verse,
33  As every artist at his uttermost.

31  ma or convien che mio seguir desista
32  più dietro a sua bellezza, poetando,
33  come a l'ultimo suo ciascuno artista.

34  Such as I leave her to a greater fame
35  Than any of my trumpet, which is bringing
36  Its arduous matter to a final close,

34  Cotal qual io la lascio a maggior bando
35  che quel de la mia tuba, che deduce
36  l'ardüa sua matera terminando,

37  With voice and gesture of a perfect leader
38  She recommenced: "We from the greatest body
39  Have issued to the heaven that is pure light;

37  con atto e voce di spedito duce
38  ricominciò: “Noi siamo usciti fore
39  del maggior corpo al ciel ch'è pura luce:

40  Light intellectual replete with love,
41  Love of true good replete with ecstasy,
42  Ecstasy that transcendeth every sweetness.

40  luce intellettüal, piena d'amore;
41  amor di vero ben, pien di letizia;
42  letizia che trascende ogne dolzore. 

43  Here shalt thou see the one host and the other
44  Of Paradise, and one in the same aspects
45  Which at the final judgment thou shalt see."

43  Qui vederai l'una e l'altra milizia
44  di paradiso, e l'una in quelli aspetti
45  che tu vedrai a l'ultima giustizia.”

46  Even as a sudden lightning that disperses
47  The visual spirits, so that it deprives
48  The eye of impress from the strongest objects,

46  Come sùbito lampo che discetti
47  li spiriti visivi, sì che priva
48  da l'atto l'occhio di più forti obietti,

49  Thus round about me flashed a living light,
50  And left me swathed around with such a veil
51  Of its effulgence, that I nothing saw.

49  così mi circunfulse luce viva,
50  e lasciommi fasciato di tal velo
51  del suo fulgor, che nulla m'appariva.

52  "Ever the Love which quieteth this heaven
53  Welcomes into itself with such salute,
54  To make the candle ready for its flame."

52  “Sempre l'amor che queta questo cielo
53  accoglie in sé con sì fatta salute,
54  per far disposto a sua fiamma il candelo.”

55  No sooner had within me these brief words
56  An entrance found, than I perceived myself
57  To be uplifted over my own power,

55  Non fur più tosto dentro a me venute
56  queste parole brievi, ch'io compresi
57  me sormontar di sopr' a mia virtute;

58  And I with vision new rekindled me,
59  Such that no light whatever is so pure
60  But that mine eyes were fortified against it.

58  e di novella vista mi raccesi
59  tale, che nulla luce è tanto mera,
60  che li occhi miei non si fosser difesi;

61  And light I saw in fashion of a river
62  Fulvid with its effulgence, 'twixt two banks
63  Depicted with an admirable Spring.

61  e vidi lume in forma di rivera
62  fulvido di fulgore, intra due rive
63  dipinte di mirabil primavera.

64  Out of this river issued living sparks,
65  And on all sides sank down into the flowers,
66  Like unto rubies that are set in gold;

64  Di tal fiumana uscian faville vive,
65 e d'ogne parte si mettien ne' fiori,
66 quasi rubin che oro circunscrive;

67  And then, as if inebriate with the odours,
68  They plunged again into the wondrous torrent,
69  And as one entered issued forth another.

67  poi, come inebrïate da li odori,
68  riprofondavan sé nel miro gurge,
69  e s'una intrava, un'altra n'uscia fori.

70  "The high desire, that now inflames and moves thee
71  To have intelligence of what thou seest,
72  Pleaseth me all the more, the more it swells.

70  “L'alto disio che mo t'infiamma e urge,
71  d'aver notizia di ciò che tu vei,
72  tanto mi piace più quanto più turge;

73  But of this water it behoves thee drink
74  Before so great a thirst in thee be slaked."
75  Thus said to me the sunshine of mine eyes;

73  ma di quest' acqua convien che tu bei
74  prima che tanta sete in te si sazi”:
75  così mi disse il sol de li occhi miei.

76  And added: "The river and the topazes
77  Going in and out, and the laughing of the herbage,
78  Are of their truth foreshadowing prefaces;

76  Anche soggiunse: “Il fiume e li topazi
77  ch'entrano ed escono e 'l rider de l'erbe
78  son di lor vero umbriferi prefazi. 

79  Not that these things are difficult in themselves,
80  But the deficiency is on thy side,
81  For yet thou hast not vision so exalted."

79  Non che da sé sian queste cose acerbe;
80  ma è difetto da la parte tua,
81  che non hai viste ancor tanto superbe.”

82  There is no babe that leaps so suddenly
83  With face towards the milk, if he awake
84  Much later than his usual custom is,

82  Non è fantin che sì sùbito rua
83  col volto verso il latte, se si svegli
84  molto tardato da l'usanza sua 

85  As I did, that I might make better mirrors
86  Still of mine eyes, down stooping to the wave
87  Which flows that we therein be better made.

85  come fec' io, per far migliori spegli
86  ancor de li occhi, chinandomi a l'onda
87 che si deriva perché vi s'immegli;

88  And even as the penthouse of mine eyelids
89  Drank of it, it forthwith appeared to me
90  Out of its length to be transformed to round.

88  e sì come di lei bevve la gronda
89  de le palpebre mie, così mi parve
90  di sua lunghezza divenuta tonda.

91  Then as a folk who have been under masks
92  Seem other than before, if they divest
93  The semblance not their own they disappeared in,

91  Poi, come gente stata sotto larve,
92  che pare altro che prima, se si sveste
93  la sembianza non süa in che disparve,

94  Thus into greater pomp were changed for me
95  The flowerets and the sparks, so that I saw
96  Both of the Courts of Heaven made manifest.

94  così mi si cambiaro in maggior feste
95  li fiori e le faville, sì ch'io vidi
96  ambo le corti del ciel manifeste.

97  O splendour of God! by means of which I saw
98  The lofty triumph of the realm veracious,
99  Give me the power to say how it I saw!

97  O isplendor di Dio, per cu' io vidi
98  l'alto trïunfo del regno verace,
99  dammi virtù a dir com'ïo il vidi!

100  There is a light above, which visible
101  Makes the Creator unto every creature,
102  Who only in beholding Him has peace,

100  Lume è là sù che visibile face
101 lo creatore a quella creatura
102 che solo in lui vedere ha la sua pace.

103  And it expands itself in circular form
104  To such extent, that its circumference
105  Would be too large a girdle for the sun.

103  E' si distende in circular figura,
104 in tanto che la sua circunferenza
105 sarebbe al sol troppo larga cintura.

106  The semblance of it is all made of rays
107  Reflected from the top of Primal Motion,
108  Which takes therefrom vitality and power.

106  Fassi di raggio tutta sua parvenza
107  reflesso al sommo del mobile primo,
108  che prende quindi vivere e potenza.

109  And as a hill in water at its base
110  Mirrors itself, as if to see its beauty
111  When affluent most in verdure and in flowers,

109  E come clivo in acqua di suo imo
110  si specchia, quasi per vedersi addorno,
111  quando è nel verde e ne' fioretti opimo,

112  So, ranged aloft all round about the light,
113  Mirrored I saw in more ranks than a thousand
114  All who above there have from us returned.

112  sì, soprastando al lume intorno intorno,
113  vidi specchiarsi in più di mille soglie
114  quanto di noi là sù fatto ha ritorno.

115  And if the lowest row collect within it
116  So great a light, how vast the amplitude
117  Is of this Rose in its extremest leaves!

115  E se l'infimo grado in sé raccoglie
116  sì grande lume, quanta è la larghezza
117  di questa rosa ne l'estreme foglie!

118  My vision in the vastness and the height
119  Lost not itself, but comprehended all
120  The quantity and quality of that gladness.

118  La vista mia ne l'ampio e ne l'altezza
119  non si smarriva, ma tutto prendeva
120  il quanto e 'l quale di quella allegrezza.

121  There near and far nor add nor take away;
122  For there where God immediately doth govern,
123  The natural law in naught is relevant.

121  Presso e lontano, lì, né pon né leva:
122 ché dove Dio sanza mezzo governa,
123 la legge natural nulla rileva.

124  Into the yellow of the Rose Eternal
125  That spreads, and multiplies, and breathes an odour
126  Of praise unto the ever-vernal Sun,

124  Nel giallo de la rosa sempiterna,
125 che si digrada e dilata e redole
126  odor di lode al sol che sempre verna,

127  As one who silent is and fain would speak,
128  Me Beatrice drew on, and said: "Behold
129  Of the white stoles how vast the convent is!

130  Behold how vast the circuit of our city!
131  Behold our seats so filled to overflowing,
132  That here henceforward are few people wanting!

130  Vedi nostra città quant' ella gira;
131  vedi li nostri scanni sì ripieni,
132  che poca gente più ci si disira.

133  On that great throne whereon thine eyes are fixed
134  For the crown's sake already placed upon it,
135  Before thou suppest at this wedding feast

133  E 'n quel gran seggio a che tu li occhi tieni
134  per la corona che già v'è sù posta,
135  prima che tu a queste nozze ceni,

136  Shall sit the soul (that is to be Augustus
137  On earth) of noble Henry, who shall come
138  To redress Italy ere she be ready.

136  sederà l'alma, che fia giù agosta,
137  de l'alto Arrigo, ch'a drizzare Italia
138  verrà in prima ch'ella sia disposta.

139  Blind covetousness, that casts its spell upon you,
140  Has made you like unto the little child,
141  Who dies of hunger and drives off the nurse.

139  La cieca cupidigia che v'ammalia
140  simili fatti v'ha al fantolino
141  che muor per fame e caccia via la balia.



142  And in the sacred forum then shall be
143  A Prefect such, that openly or covert
144  On the same road he will not walk with him.

142  E fia prefetto nel foro divino
143  allora tal, che palese e coverto
144  non anderà con lui per un cammino.

145  But long of God he will not be endured
146  In holy office; he shall be thrust down
147  Where Simon Magus is for his deserts,

145  Ma poco poi sarà da Dio sofferto
146  nel santo officio: ch'el sarà detruso
147  là dove Simon mago è per suo merto,

148  And make him of Alagna lower go!"

148  e farà quel d'Alagna intrar più giuso.”

Canto XXXI
Moreover, the Empyrean Heaven by its peace resembles the Divine Science, which is full of all peace and suffers no diversity of opinion or sophistical reasoning because of the supreme certainty of its subject, which is God. Christ says of this science to his disciples: “My peace I give to you, my peace I leave with you,” giving and leaving to them his teaching, which is this science of which I speak.  Solomon, speaking of this science, says: “The queens number sixty, and the concubines eighty; and of the young handmaids there is no number: one is my dove and my perfect one.”  He calls all sciences queens and friends and handmaids, but this one he calls perfect because it makes us see truth perfectly, in which our souls find rest.

Convivio, Chapter 14

The conclusion of Canto 30 is shocking because, here, in paradise, there is still the acrimony, which properly belongs to earth, and specifically to the historical, temporal earth of Dante's time.  Here in Canto 31 that feeling of acrimony has been purged.  I've been thinking of two words in conjunction with this canto: the ordinary and the extraordinary.  The ordinary is a state of bondage to sequential time, it belongs to memory and to anticipation, and in this state we can be nothing but pilgrims, aspirants, exiles, and nomads.  Where is time going?  Where are any narrative structures, as has been the whole of the Commedia, going?  It and they are interminable, either as a wreckage of regrets or as the poignancy of nostalgia and unrecoverable past happiness, or a just out of our grasp future paradise, or the oncoming shadow of annihilation and death.  There is no place on this sinuous line where peace can become the home and habitation of a perfected Self.  This canto contains mini-narratives having to do with the astonishment of a pilgrim reaching the goal of their quest and finding there something utterly extraordinary — of barbarians reaching the splendors of Rome, of a pilgrim seeing the veil of Veronica, and these narratives are linked to the astonishment that Dante, the aspirant, succumbs to when he turns to address Beatrice, and finds instead an old man, not a lover, but a father-figure.  This is perhaps the true image of any persistent spiritual seeker who is male, that is, he finds at the end of his pilgrimage the image of his self, perfected, like fine wine, by the vicissitudes of time.  Dante is experiencing his own ordination, a word etymologically rooted in the word "order."  That earth time of the serpentine sequence was the mother of disorder, spectacular in her disappointments and injustices.  I choose the word spectacular deliberately, because there is in this canto another lesson which cannot be learned in the ordinary sequence of narration, which is, the transmutation of images into essences.  It must have dawned on the reader by now that Dante as he reaches the apotheosis of this poem must have a way to make words descriptive of the ineffable.  He does this by breaking the membrane of the illusory, which can be described in the language which linguists call signs, words that stand for things or even ideas, a false equivalency that confuses us into believing that the complexity of the world of temporal things, temporary images, can be conveyed in a vehicle composed of small mouth noises.  To overcome this inherent ineffability, one has to create a structure of like complexity to the thing being expressed.  Dante, more than almost any other artist does just this.  His poetry is so rich, that he escapes this fog of comparisons of mists intermingling with mists, the very progenitors of disorder, the no man's land of nominalisms, things pretending to be fixed in nouns, but actually ever being/becoming, ever moving and changing actions, the most vital of which are that thing we call ourselves, a face in the mirror, or in the mirror of the eyes of others, a name, a reputation, a marker that places us somewhere in the social and natural order — as if that order could be in any such fashion fixed!  But here we are in a paradise, which is not fixed, in the sense that it has no differences, no movement.  On the contrary, this paradise is full of movement, an immense revolving rose of dancing light and dignified music — in a word, this is a world of imperishable essence, of imperishable order.  And this world, us readers, if we have been paying attention, leaving our footprints, like the blessed Beatrice, in Hell, as well as in Purgatory, and finding suddenly that this entire sequential narration has been in actuality the perfected shape of a single ineffable metaphor.  The distance between Dante and Beatrice, although it exceeds the distance from the highest to the lowest, is, as metaphor, as close and clear as any intimacy could be, the last shred of appearance being shredded by its inner radiance of essence.  We have gone in our love from Eros to agape, from Beatrice to Bernard, and yet we have not lost the former to enjoy the latter.  True wholeness can never be about loss, and if we think of the petals of this eternal rose as the petals of a vagina into which love enters and from which the generations burgeon, we will not find it sacrilegious to share in this experience of Dante, as he is ordained by Bernard, into the cult of Mary, the sea of infinitude from which the finite is born — but with this difference:  Mary's sea is unlike the sea of this planet's oceans, however fecund they are and have been.  Mary's sea is a sea of motherly care, a sea that engenders devotion in its children, and it is this devotion which changes the tragic scenarios of mortal life into joy and love.   One verse in this canto stands out as a signal for this change, in which Dante says that his words cannot keep pace with the images that are inundating him.  He has literally found what John Keats calls the blushful Hippocrene, the wellspring of infinitude that inspires the kind of poetry that the Commedia embodies, a spring whose baptismal font, not only satisfies every thirst, purges every misperception, but also brings with it a transformation from chaos to order.  Of all that poems that I can think of, none are so astonishingly well ordered as this poem by Dante, and none so adept at completely avoiding the stagnation of a rigid order freezing solidity into stasis.  (Recall here the image of Satan totally frozen at the nadir of Hell, with absolutely no freedom to change his state, and forever productive of evil by mere mechanical automaticity.)  Dante's order, like Bach's, is an order that flows, an order, that in fact, circulates.  It circulates like the blood in a living human body, renewing and feeding the entire inner cosmos with all its enumerable cells and selves.  His poem is finite, but its influence, like the influenza of the stars, is infinitely productive of insight and the rush of joy which each new insight breeds.  I think one of the most astonishing things about his poetry, one that sets him apart from great poets like Whitman, or Blake, or Garcia Lorca, is that he has found a way to transform his irrational griefs and ecstasies into logic and reason.  The whole poem, like some great linguistic Chartres Cathedral, is architecturally sound, a rhetoric of reason, with an utterly miraculous totality of effect.  His rationality orders the irrational and makes it both loving and beautiful at the same time.  And if we extend this beauty and love which infects us as readers, it is as if we have been on a pilgrimage all along and suddenly come upon that face imprinted as the true icon, the vera icona, the veil of Veronica, this thin illusion of language and imagination impossibly giving us the true essence of the divine.  We blink our eyes and wonder: Can this be?  A question, any answer to which diminishes that state of wonder which comes with any confrontation with our own cosmic destiny.

1  In fashion then as of a snow-white rose
2  Displayed itself to me the saintly host,
3  Whom Christ in his own blood had made his bride,

1  In forma dunque di candida rosa
2  mi si mostrava la milizia santa
3  che nel suo sangue Cristo fece sposa;

4  But the other host, that flying sees and sings
5  The glory of Him who doth enamour it,
6  And the goodness that created it so noble,

4  ma l'altra, che volando vede e canta
5  la gloria di colui che la 'nnamora
6 e la bontà che la fece cotanta,

7  Even as a swarm of bees, that sinks in flowers
8  One moment, and the next returns again
9  To where its labour is to sweetness turned,

7  sì come schiera d'ape che s'infiora
8  una fïata e una si ritorna
9  là dove suo laboro s'insapora,

10  Sank into the great flower, that is adorned
11  With leaves so many, and thence reascended
12  To where its love abideth evermore.

10  nel gran fior discendeva che s'addorna
11  di tante foglie, e quindi risaliva
12  là dove 'l süo amor sempre soggiorna.

13  Their faces had they all of living flame,
14  And wings of gold, and all the rest so white
15  No snow unto that limit doth attain.

13  Le facce tutte avean di fiamma viva
14  e l'ali d'oro, e l'altro tanto bianco,
15  che nulla neve a quel termine arriva.

16  From bench to bench, into the flower descending,
17  They carried something of the peace and ardour
18  Which by the fanning of their flanks they won.

16  Quando scendean nel fior, di banco in banco
17  porgevan de la pace e de l'ardore
18  ch'elli acquistavan ventilando il fianco.

19  Nor did the interposing 'twixt the flower
20  And what was o'er it of such plenitude
21  Of flying shapes impede the sight and splendour;

19  Né l'interporsi tra 'l disopra e 'l fiore
20  di tanta moltitudine volante
21  impediva la vista e lo splendore:

22  Because the light divine so penetrates
23  The universe, according to its merit,
24  That naught can be an obstacle against it.

22  ché la luce divina è penetrante
23  per l'universo secondo ch'è degno,
24  sì che nulla le puote essere ostante.

25  This realm secure and full of gladsomeness,
26  Crowded with ancient people and with modern,
27  Unto one mark had all its look and love.

25  Questo sicuro e gaudïoso regno,
26  frequente in gente antica e in novella,
27  viso e amore avea tutto ad un segno.

28  O Trinal Light, that in a single star
29  Sparkling upon their sight so satisfies them,
30  Look down upon our tempest here below!

28  Oh trina luce che 'n unica stella
29  scintillando a lor vista, sì li appaga!
30  guarda qua giuso a la nostra procella!

31  If the barbarians, coming from some region
32  That every day by Helice is covered,
33  Revolving with her son whom she delights in,

31  Se i barbari, venendo da tal plaga
32  che ciascun giorno d'Elice si cuopra,
33  rotante col suo figlio ond' ella è vaga,

34  Beholding Rome and all her noble works,
35  Were wonder-struck, what time the Lateran
36  Above all mortal things was eminent,—

34  veggendo Roma e l'ardüa sua opra,
35  stupefaciensi, quando Laterano
36  a le cose mortali andò di sopra;

37  I who to the divine had from the human,
38  From time unto eternity, had come,
39  From Florence to a people just and sane,

37  ïo, che al divino da l'umano,
38  a l'etterno dal tempo era venuto,
39  e di Fiorenza in popol giusto e sano,

40  With what amazement must I have been filled!
41  Truly between this and the joy, it was
42  My pleasure not to hear, and to be mute.

40  di che stupor dovea esser compiuto!
41  Certo tra esso e 'l gaudio mi facea
42  libito non udire e starmi muto.

43  And as a pilgrim who delighteth him
44  In gazing round the temple of his vow,
45  And hopes some day to retell how it was,

43  E quasi peregrin che si ricrea
44  nel tempio del suo voto riguardando,
45  e spera già ridir com' ello stea,

46  So through the living light my way pursuing
47  Directed I mine eyes o'er all the ranks,
48  Now up, now down, and now all round about.

46  su per la viva luce passeggiando,
47  menava ïo li occhi per li gradi,
48  mo sù, mo giù e mo recirculando.

49  Faces I saw of charity persuasive,
50  Embellished by His light and their own smile,
51  And attitudes adorned with every grace.

49  Vedëa visi a carità süadi,
50  d'altrui lume fregiati e di suo riso,
51  e atti ornati di tutte onestadi.

52  The general form of Paradise already
53  My glance had comprehended as a whole,
54  In no part hitherto remaining fixed,

52  La forma general di paradiso
53  già tutta mïo sguardo avea compresa,
54  in nulla parte ancor fermato fiso;

55  And round I turned me with rekindled wish
56  My Lady to interrogate of things
57  Concerning which my mind was in suspense.

55  e volgeami con voglia rïaccesa
56  per domandar la mia donna di cose
57  di che la mente mia era sospesa.

58  One thing I meant, another answered me;
59  I thought I should see Beatrice, and saw
60  An Old Man habited like the glorious people.

58  Uno intendëa, e altro mi rispuose:
59  credea veder Beatrice e vidi un sene
60  vestito con le genti glorïose.

61  O'erflowing was he in his eyes and cheeks
62  With joy benign, in attitude of pity
63  As to a tender father is becoming.

61  Diffuso era per li occhi e per le gene
62  di benigna letizia, in atto pio
63  quale a tenero padre si convene.

64  And "She, where is she?" instantly I said;
65  Whence he: "To put an end to thy desire,
66  Me Beatrice hath sent from mine own place.

64  E “Ov' è ella?” sùbito diss' io.
65  Ond' elli: “A terminar lo tuo disiro
66  mosse Beatrice me del loco mio;

67  And if thou lookest up to the third round
68  Of the first rank, again shalt thou behold her
69  Upon the throne her merits have assigned her."

67  e se riguardi sù nel terzo giro
68  dal sommo grado, tu la rivedrai
69  nel trono che suoi merti le sortiro.”

70  Without reply I lifted up mine eyes,
71  And saw her, as she made herself a crown
72  Reflecting from herself the eternal rays.

70  Sanza risponder, li occhi sù levai,
71  e vidi lei che si facea corona
72  reflettendo da sé li etterni rai.

73  Not from that region which the highest thunders
74  Is any mortal eye so far removed,
75  In whatsoever sea it deepest sinks,

73  Da quella regïon che più sù tona
74  occhio mortale alcun tanto non dista,
75  qualunque in mare più giù s'abbandona,

76  As there from Beatrice my sight; but this
77  Was nothing unto me; because her image
78  Descended not to me by medium blurred.

76  quanto lì da Beatrice la mia vista;
77  ma nulla mi facea, ché süa effige
78  non discendëa a me per mezzo mista.
79  "O Lady, thou in whom my hope is strong,
80   And who for my salvation didst endure
81  In Hell to leave the imprint of thy feet,

79  “O donna in cui la mia speranza vige,
80  e che soffristi per la mia salute
81  in inferno lasciar le tue vestige,

82  Of whatsoever things I have beheld,
83  As coming from thy power and from thy goodness
84  I recognise the virtue and the grace.

82  di tante cose quant' i' ho vedute,
83  dal tuo podere e da la tua bontate
84  riconosco la grazia e la virtute.

85  Thou from a slave hast brought me unto freedom,
86  By all those ways, by all the expedients,
87  Whereby thou hadst the power of doing it.

85  Tu m'hai di servo tratto a libertate
86  per tutte quelle vie, per tutt' i modi
87  che di ciò fare avei la potestate.

88  Preserve towards me thy magnificence,
89  So that this soul of mine, which thou hast healed,
90  Pleasing to thee be loosened from the body."

88  La tua magnificenza in me custodi,
89  sì che l'anima mia, che fatt' hai sana,
90  piacente a te dal corpo si disnodi.”

91  Thus I implored; and she, so far away,
92  Smiled, as it seemed, and looked once more at me;
93  Then unto the eternal fountain turned.

91  Così orai; e quella, sì lontana
92  come parea, sorrise e riguardommi;
93  poi si tornò a l'etterna fontana.

94  And said the Old Man holy: "That thou mayst
95  Accomplish perfectly thy journeying,
96  Whereunto prayer and holy love have sent me,

94  E 'l santo sene: “Acciò che tu assommi
95  perfettamente,” disse, “il tuo cammino,
96  a che priego e amor santo mandommi,

97  Fly with thine eyes all round about this garden;
98  For seeing it will discipline thy sight
99  Farther to mount along the ray divine.

97  vola con li occhi per questo giardino;
98  ché veder lui t'acconcerà lo sguardo
99  più al montar per lo raggio divino.

100  And she, the Queen of Heaven, for whom I burn
101  Wholly with love, will grant us every grace,
102  Because that I her faithful Bernard am."

100  E la regina del cielo, ond'ïo ardo
101  tutto d'amor, ne farà ogne grazia,
102  però ch'i' sono il suo fedel Bernardo.”

103  As he who peradventure from Croatia
104  Cometh to gaze at our Veronica,
105  Who through its ancient fame is never sated,

103  Qual è colui che forse di Croazia
104  viene a veder la Veronica nostra,
105  che per l'antica fame non sen sazia,

106  But says in thought, the while it is displayed,
107  "My Lord, Christ Jesus, God of very God,
108  Now was your semblance made like unto this?"

106  ma dice nel pensier, fin che si mostra:
107   “Segnor mio Iesù Cristo, Dio verace,
108   or fu sì fatta la sembianza vostra?”;

109  Even such was I while gazing at the living
110  Charity of the man, who in this world
111  By contemplation tasted of that peace.

109  tal era io mirando la vivace
110  carità di colui che 'n questo mondo,
111  contemplando, gustò di quella pace.

112  "Thou son of grace, this jocund life," began he,
113  "Will not be known to thee by keeping ever
114  Thine eyes below here on the lowest place;

112  “Figliuol di grazia, quest' esser giocondo,”
113  cominciò elli, “non ti sarà noto,
114  tenendo li occhi pur qua giù al fondo;

115  But mark the circles to the most remote,
116  Until thou shalt behold enthroned the Queen
117  To whom this realm is subject and devoted."

115  ma guarda i cerchi infino al più remoto,
116  tanto che veggi seder la regina
117  cui questo regno è suddito e devoto.”

118  I lifted up mine eyes, and as at morn
119  The oriental part of the horizon
120  Surpasses that wherein the sun goes down,

118  Io levai li occhi; e come da mattina
119  la parte orïental de l'orizzonte
120  soverchia quella dove 'l sol declina,

121  Thus, as if going with mine eyes from vale
122  To mount, I saw a part in the remoteness
123  Surpass in splendour all the other front.

121  così, quasi di valle andando a monte
122  con li occhi, vidi parte ne lo stremo
123  vincer di lume tutta l'altra fronte.

124  And even as there where we await the pole
125  That Phaeton drove badly, blazes more
126  The light, and is on either side diminished,

124  E come quivi ove s'aspetta il temo
125  che mal guidò Fetonte, più s'infiamma,
126  e quinci e quindi il lume si fa scemo, 

127  So likewise that pacific oriflamme
128  Gleamed brightest in the centre, and each side
129  In equal measure did the flame abate.

127  così quella pacifica oriafiamma
128  nel mezzo s'avvivava, e d'ogne parte
129  per igual modo allentava la fiamma;

130  And at that centre, with their wings expanded,
131  More than a thousand jubilant Angels saw I,
132  Each differing in effulgence and in kind.

130  e a quel mezzo, con le penne sparte,
131  vid' io più di mille angeli festanti,
132  ciascun distinto di fulgore e d'arte.

133  I saw there at their sports and at their songs
134  A beauty smiling, which the gladness was
135  Within the eyes of all the other saints;

133  Vidi a lor giochi quivi e a lor canti
134  ridere una bellezza, che letizia
135  era ne li occhi a tutti li altri santi;

136  And if I had in speaking as much wealth
137  As in imagining, I should not dare
138  To attempt the smallest part of its delight.

136  e s'io avessi in dir tanta divizia
137  quanta ad imaginar, non ardirei
138  lo minimo tentar di sua delizia.

139  Bernard, as soon as he beheld mine eyes
140  Fixed and intent upon its fervid fervour,
141  His own with such affection turned to her

139  Bernardo, come vide li occhi miei
140  nel caldo suo caler fissi e attenti,
141  li suoi con tanto affetto volse a lei,

142  That it made mine more ardent to behold.

142  che ' miei di rimirar fé più ardenti.

Canto XXXII
Here, in the penultimate canto of the Commedia, we have reached that rose-shaped eternity wherein the brightest, the most loving, and the most joyful, take simultaneously the shapes of the petals of the robe, and the shapes of their own individual spirits.  No animals nor plants nor any geologic features exist here, this is, as Blake would later have it, the Divine Human.  And what has made these humans divine?  They have turned their love and devotion to something outside of themselves — to the human shapes, of those, like themselves, who had their eyes and hearts and actions fixed upon that brightness, love, and joy, which embodies them, but also which gives them a body and an identity, and whose effulgence has brought them to this pinnacle of ineffable splendor.  What does a person love most?  Other people.  And so, in this canto we get a litany of the loving/lovable, all of whom are sanctified by a name and an identity made everlasting by their capacity to love.  Nothing exists in this heaven that any human child could fail to understand, and indeed, the children who make up a large part of this petaled paradise have no other merit except that of having been loved.  For Dante, Heaven is a rose whose living form is entirely comprised of the beloved.  Beatrice, Saint Lucy, and Mary, are respectively: personal love, love of light, love of the engendering ocean of the infinite.  The end of the canto, however, has what might be thought quite curious, if as readers, we have not been cognizant that this pilgrimage, this geometry which has brought us here, is entirely composed of words, and the metaphors, indeed, the simile that Bernard proclaims, and that through him, Dante also proclaims, is that through words blessedness is obtained — words of poetry, which are simultaneously words of prayer and praise.  Throughout these last canti the words of the poem have been, as it were, weaving webs to contain the ineffable, and here we have arrived at that condition in which specific human beings — who are not ineffable in their forms, histories, and identities — but in their love.  Now astonishingly we have come to understand that our entire comprehension of these entities, these identities — their communal shape ever becoming this fantastical rose — is entirely made possible by words.  Wallace Stevens says "it is a world of words to the end of it," and here, where we have indeed almost reached the limit, that end, of what words are, and of what they can do, Bernard tells us flat out, that if we want to attain apotheosis, we must follow his words as they comprise and are comprised by the Mother of God.

1  Absorbed in his delight, that contemplator
2  Assumed the willing office of a teacher,
3  And gave beginning to these holy words:

1  Affetto al suo piacer, quel contemplante
2  libero officio di dottore assunse,
3  e cominciò queste parole sante:

4  "The wound that Mary closed up and anointed,
5  She at her feet who is so beautiful,
6  She is the one who opened it and pierced it.

4  “La piaga che Maria richiuse e unse,
5  quella ch'è tanto bella da' suoi piedi
6  è colei che l'aperse e che la punse.

7   Within that order which the third seats make
8  Is seated Rachel, lower than the other,
9  With Beatrice, in manner as thou seest.

7  Ne l'ordine che fanno i terzi sedi,
8  siede Rachel di sotto da costei
9  con Bëatrice, sì come tu vedi.

10  Sarah, Rebecca, Judith, and her who was
11  Ancestress of the Singer, who for dole
12  Of the misdeed said, 'Miserere mei,'

10  Sarra e Rebecca, Iudìt e colei
12  che fu bisava al cantor che per doglia
13  del fallo disse 'Miserere mei'

13  Canst thou behold from seat to seat descending
14  Down in gradation, as with each one's name
15  I through the Rose go down from leaf to leaf.

13  puoi tu veder così di soglia in soglia
14  giù digradar, com' io ch'a proprio nome
15  vo per la rosa giù di foglia in foglia.

16  And downward from the seventh row, even as
17  Above the same, succeed the Hebrew women,
18  Dividing all the tresses of the flower;

16  E dal settimo grado in giù, sì come
17  infino ad esso, succedono Ebree,
18  dirimendo del fior tutte le chiome;

19  Because, according to the view which Faith
20  In Christ had taken, these are the partition
21  By which the sacred stairways are divided.

19  perché, secondo lo sguardo che fée
20  la fede in Cristo, queste sono il muro
21  a che si parton le sacre scalee.

22  Upon this side, where perfect is the flower
23  With each one of its petals, seated are
24  Those who believed in Christ who was to come.

22  Da questa parte onde 'l fiore è maturo
23  di tutte le sue foglie, sono assisi
24  quei che credettero in Cristo venturo;

25  Upon the other side, where intersected
26  With vacant spaces are the semicircles,
27  Are those who looked to Christ already come.

25  da l'altra parte onde sono intercisi
26  di vòti i semicirculi, si stanno
27  quei ch'a Cristo venuto ebber li visi.

28  And as, upon this side, the glorious seat
29  Of the Lady of Heaven, and the other seats
30  Below it, such a great division make,

28  E come quinci il glorïoso scanno
29  de la donna del cielo e li altri scanni
30  di sotto lui cotanta cerna fanno,

31  So opposite doth that of the great John,
32  Who, ever holy, desert and martyrdom
33  Endured, and afterwards two years in Hell.

31  così di contra quel del gran Giovanni,
32  che sempre santo 'l diserto e 'l martiro
33  sofferse, e poi l'inferno da due anni;

34  And under him thus to divide were chosen
35  Francis, and Benedict, and Augustine,
36  And down to us the rest from round to round.

34  e sotto lui così cerner sortiro
35  Francesco, Benedetto e Augustino
36  e altri fin qua giù di giro in giro.

37  Behold now the high providence divine;
38  For one and other aspect of the Faith
39  In equal measure shall this garden fill.

37  Or mira l'alto proveder divino:
38  ché l'uno e l'altro aspetto de la fede
39  igualmente empierà questo giardino.

40  And know that downward from that rank which cleaves
41  Midway the sequence of the two divisions,
42  Not by their proper merit are they seated;

40  E sappi che dal grado in giù che fiede
41  a mezzo il tratto le due discrezioni,
42  per nullo proprio merito si siede,

43  But by another's under fixed conditions;
44  For these are spirits one and all assoiled
45  Before they any true election had.

43  ma per l'altrui, con certe condizioni:
44  ché tutti questi son spiriti asciolti
45  prima ch'avesser vere elezïoni.

46  Well canst thou recognise it in their faces,
47  And also in their voices puerile,
48  If thou regard them well and hearken to them.

46  Ben te ne puoi accorger per li volti
47  e anche per le voci püerili,
48  se tu li guardi bene e se li ascolti.

49  Now doubtest thou, and doubting thou art silent;
50  But I will loosen for thee the strong bond
51  In which thy subtile fancies hold thee fast.

49  Or dubbi tu e dubitando sili;
50  ma io discioglierò 'l forte legame
51  in che ti stringon li pensier sottili.

52  Within the amplitude of this domain
53  No casual point can possibly find place,
54  No more than sadness can, or thirst, or hunger;

52  Dentro a l'ampiezza di questo reame
53  casüal punto non puote aver sito,
54  se non come tristizia o sete o fame:

55  For by eternal law has been established
56  Whatever thou beholdest, so that closely
57  The ring is fitted to the finger here.

55  ché per etterna legge è stabilito
56  quantunque vedi, sì che giustamente
57  ci si risponde da l'anello al dito;

58  And therefore are these people, festinate
59  Unto true life, not 'sine causa' here
60  More and less excellent among themselves.

58  e però questa festinata gente
59  a vera vita non è sine causa
60  intra sé qui più e meno eccellente.

61  The King, by means of whom this realm reposes
62  In so great love and in so great delight
63  That no will ventureth to ask for more,

61  Lo rege per cui questo regno pausa
62  in tanto amore e in tanto diletto,
63  che nulla volontà è di più ausa

64  In his own joyous aspect every mind
65  Creating, at his pleasure dowers with grace
66  Diversely; and let here the effect suffice.

64  le menti tutte nel suo lieto aspetto
65  creando, a suo piacer di grazia dota
66  diversamente; e qui basti l'effetto.

67  And this is clearly and expressly noted
68  For you in Holy Scripture, in those twins
69  Who in their mother had their anger roused.

67  E ciò espresso e chiaro vi si nota
68  ne la Scrittura santa in quei gemelli
69  che ne la madre ebber l'ira commota.

70  According to the colour of the hair,
71  Therefore, with such a grace the light supreme
72  Consenteth that they worthily be crowned.

70  Però, secondo il color d'i capelli,
71  di cotal grazia l'altissimo lume
72  degnamente convien che s'incappelli.

73  Without, then, any merit of their deeds,
74  Stationed are they in different gradations,
75  Differing only in their first acuteness.

73  Dunque, sanza mercé di lor costume,
74  locati son per gradi differenti,
75  sol differendo nel primiero acume.

76  'Tis true that in the early centuries,
77  With innocence, to work out their salvation
78  Sufficient was the faith of parents only.

76  Bastavasi ne' secoli recenti
77  con l'innocenza, per aver salute,
78  solamente la fede d'i parenti;

79  After the earlier ages were completed,
80  Behoved it that the males by circumcision
81  Unto their innocent wings should virtue add;

79  poi che le prime etadi fuor compiute,
80  convenne ai maschi a l'innocenti penne
81  per circuncidere acquistar virtute;

82  But after that the time of grace had come
83  Without the baptism absolute of Christ,
84  Such innocence below there was retained.

82  ma poi che 'l tempo de la grazia venne,
83  sanza battesmo perfetto di Cristo
84  tale innocenza là giù si ritenne.

85  Look now into the face that unto Christ
86  Hath most resemblance; for its brightness only
87  Is able to prepare thee to see Christ."

85  Riguarda omai ne la faccia che a Cristo
86  più si somiglia, ché la sua chiarezza
87  sola ti può disporre a veder Cristo.”

88  On her did I behold so great a gladness
89  Rain down, borne onward in the holy minds
90  Created through that altitude to fly,

88  Io vidi sopra lei tanta allegrezza
89  piover, portata ne le menti sante
90  create a trasvolar per quella altezza,

91  That whatsoever I had seen before
92  Did not suspend me in such admiration,
93  Nor show me such similitude of God.

91  che quantunque io avea visto davante,
92  di tanta ammirazion non mi sospese,
93  né mi mostrò di Dio tanto sembiante;

94  And the same Love that first descended there,
95  "Ave Maria, gratia plena," singing,
96  In front of her his wings expanded wide.

94  e quello amor che primo lì discese,
95  cantando “Ave, Maria, gratïa plena,”
96  dinanzi a lei le sue ali distese.

97  Unto the canticle divine responded
98  From every part the court beatified,
99  So that each sight became serener for it.

97  Rispuose a la divina cantilena
98  da tutte parti la beata corte,
99  si ch'ogne vista sen fé più serena.

100  "O holy father, who for me endurest
101  To be below here, leaving the sweet place
102  In which thou sittest by eternal lot,

100  “O santo padre, che per me comporte
101  l'esser qua giù, lasciando il dolce loco
102  nel qual tu siedi per etterna sorte,

103  Who is the Angel that with so much joy
104  Into the eyes is looking of our Queen,
105  Enamoured so that he seems made of fire?"

103  qual è quell' angel che con tanto gioco
104  guarda ne li occhi la nostra regina,
105  innamorato si che par di foco?”

106  Thus I again recourse had to the teaching
107  Of that one who delighted him in Mary
108  As doth the star of morning in the sun.

106  Così ricorsi ancora a la dottrina
107  di colui ch'abbelliva di Maria,
108  come del sole stella mattutina.

109  And he to me: "Such gallantry and grace
110  As there can be in Angel and in soul,
111  All is in him; and thus we fain would have it;

109  Ed elli a me: “Baldezza e leggiadria
110  quant' esser puote in angelo e in alma,
111  tutta è in lui; e sì volem che sia,

112  Because he is the one who bore the palm
113  Down unto Mary, when the Son of God
114  To take our burden on himself decreed.

112  perch' elli è quelli che portò la palma
113  giuso a Maria, quando 'l Figliuol di Dio
114  carcar si volse de la nostra salma.

115  But now come onward with thine eyes, as I
116  Speaking shall go, and note the great patricians
117  Of this most just and merciful of empires.

115  Ma vieni omai con li occhi sì com' io
116  andrò parlando, e nota i gran patrici
117  di questo imperio giustissimo e pio.

118  Those two that sit above there most enrapture
119  As being very near unto Augusta,
120  Are as it were the two roots of this Rose.

118  Quei due che seggon là sù più felici
119  per esser propinquissimi ad Agusta,
120  son d'esta rosa quasi due radici:

121  He who upon the left is near her placed
122  The father is, by whose audacious taste
123  The human species so much bitter tastes.

121  colui che da sinistra le s'aggiusta
122  è 'l padre per lo cui ardito gusto
123  l'umana specie tanto amaro gusta;

124  Upon the right thou seest that ancient father
125  Of Holy Church, into whose keeping Christ
126  The keys committed of this lovely flower.

124  dal destro vedi quel padre vetusto
125  di Santa Chiesa a cui Cristo le chiavi
126  raccomandò di questo fior venusto.

127  And he who all the evil days beheld,
128  Before his death, of her the beauteous bride
129  Who with the spear and with the nails was won,

127  E quei che vide tutti i tempi gravi,
128  pria che morisse, de la bella sposa
129  che s'acquistò con la lancia e coi clavi,

130  Beside him sits, and by the other rests
131  That leader under whom on manna lived
132  The people ingrate, fickle, and stiff-necked.

130  siede lungh' esso, e lungo l'altro posa
131  quel duca sotto cui visse di manna
132  la gente ingrata, mobile e retrosa.

133  Opposite Peter seest thou Anna seated,
134  So well content to look upon her daughter,
135  Her eyes she moves not while she sings Hosanna.

133  Di contr' a Pietro vedi sedere Anna,
134  tanto contenta di mirar sua figlia,
135  che non move occhio per cantare osanna;

136  And opposite the eldest household father
137  Lucia sits, she who thy Lady moved
138  When to rush downward thou didst bend thy brows.

136  e contro al maggior padre di famiglia
137  siede Lucia, che mosse la tua donna
138  quando chinavi, a rovinar, le ciglia.

139  But since the moments of thy vision fly,
140  Here will we make full stop, as a good tailor
141  Who makes the gown according to his cloth,

139  Ma perché 'l tempo fugge che t'assonna,
140  qui farem punto, come buon sartore
141  che com' elli ha del panno fa la gonna;

142  And unto the first Love will turn our eyes,
143  That looking upon Him thou penetrate
144  As far as possible through his effulgence.

142  e drizzeremo li occhi al primo amore,
143  sì che, guardando verso lui, penètri
144  quant' è possibil per lo suo fulgore.

145  Truly, lest peradventure thou recede,
146  Moving thy wings believing to advance,
147  By prayer behoves it that grace be obtained;

145  Veramente, ne forse tu t'arretri
146  movendo l'ali tue, credendo oltrarti,
147  orando grazia conven che s'impetri

148  Grace from that one who has the power to aid thee;
149  And thou shalt follow me with thy affection
150  That from my words thy heart turn not aside."

148  grazia da quella che puote aiutarti;
149  e tu mi seguirai con l'affezione,
150  sì che dal dicer mio lo cor non parti.”

151  And he began this holy orison.

151  E cominciò questa santa orazione:

Canto XXXIII
Here in the Empyrean, at the end, where all true converts of this poem, are moved towards tears, and whether those tears be of joy, of having completed such a spiritual and aesthetic pilgrimage, or whether they be of grief, because all those joys of discovery, even in the midst of sorrow, have come to end, it is rightly impossible to say.  And how strange to find at the end that the cosmos of the spirit rests on pillars of paradox and ineffability.  This Buddhistic phrase: " E io ch'al fine di tutt' i disii," and as "I reached the end of all desire," is where Dante finds the ultimate desire, pure ardor for the vision which will obliterate both his memory and his speech.
What is it that makes a person a person, if not memory and speech?  And what is so sanctified as memory and speech that can lead us to this vision wherein their functions are fulfilled in a present moment of a speaking immemorial light, a light that sets a limit to their enterprise by making them irrelevant?  Here all the angels and saints turn their eyes and their hearts to Dante, this lone supplicant, praying that he attain the vision.  That the universe is always bending its hopes and prayers for the salvation of a single person, that is the ultimate paradox, the ultimate paradise, which in Dante has been reached step by arduous, ardent, inspired step of memory and speech, and here, having exhausted the limits of his invention, his imagination, his majestic emotional range, here where he is exalted the most, he is most humble.  If as readers, we remember all those canti in the Inferno, where Dante, the aspirant, fainted, unable to sustain the horrors which Dante the poet was so vividly enumerating, it should not surprise us that here, at the last, Dante and Poseidon are fused.  In the beginning Dante compared his embarcation on this journey and his rescue by saint Lucy and Virgil to the condition of a swimmer, who having reached shore, looks back upon the water which nearly drowned him.  Here we find that that ultimate goal of that exhausted swimmer was not to reach the shore but rather to make the chaotic, fecund element his domain.  Mary, whose name of course means "sea," has made him Lord of the Waters, where paradoxically he has been most humbled, most supplicating, yet most elevated.  Ah, what can you say, there are so many wonders here, that your thoughts explode and your feelings overwhelm!  Here, in the cosmic rose, the most High's high, Dante has achieved his lowest point!  The nadir of Hell and the zenith of Paradise have circled round to kiss one another in the marraige of opposites, whose marraige rite is the poem itself.  No Divine personage, no paradox of the God/Human Christ, fulfill his vision, they are only the initiating source, the light which makes light.  It is Mary, however, whose love is the ultimate aim of the most exalted, Mary who was so humble that the Divine's aim was to fulfill itself in her womb.  All the conflicts between theists and phycists come to an end in this motherly devotion to all that is.  If all theology and astrophysics are stripped away, what remains is the paradox of LOVE.  God is Love, without beginning or end, just the simple love we might have towards anything and everything in our lives, our love of parents, children, friends, nature, and even our love of food and the humblest objects, events, and experiences.  For me all the supreme grandeurs of this poem are fulfilled mostly in how my love for it has increased my love for other things, even those things like sickness, or want, or loneliness.  Dante's poem ends here with this canto, the Commedia's enormous design has set chaos in order and is complete.  But here the commentators, readers, and what I have referred to above, as his converts, is where their interpretations begin — thus far, the Commedia has extended itself for 800 years past the date where its mortal author merged his flesh with dust.  In the first canto Dante says that he could not speak of the horrors of hell, were it not that he wished to save others from its agonies.  In this last canto he prays that he might remember enough of his vision so that he could inspire with his joy coming generations.  Dante could finish his work on his poem, but he could not end it.  Yes, Dante's Commedia stops here, but the ray of its illumination keeps extending itself into an indefinite future, where his readers, like us, in every generation, continue to discover this rose whose beauties sanctify our lives. 

1  "Thou Virgin Mother, daughter of thy Son,
2  Humble and high beyond all other creature,
3  The limit fixed of the eternal counsel,

1  “Vergine Madre, figlia del tuo figlio,
2  umile e alta più che creatura,
3  termine fisso d'etterno consiglio,

4  Thou art the one who such nobility
5  To human nature gave, that its Creator
6  Did not disdain to make himself its creature.

4  tu se' colei che l'umana natura
5  nobilitasti sì, che 'l suo fattore
6  non disdegnò di farsi sua fattura.

7  Within thy womb rekindled was the love,
8  By heat of which in the eternal peace
9  After such wise this flower has germinated.

7  Nel ventre tuo si raccese l'amore,
8  per lo cui caldo ne l'etterna pace
9  così è germinato questo fiore.

10  Here unto us thou art a noonday torch
11  Of charity, and below there among mortals
12  Thou art the living fountain-head of hope.

10  Qui se' a noi meridïana face
11  di caritate, e giuso, intra ' mortali,
12  se' di speranza fontana vivace.

13  Lady, thou art so great, and so prevailing,
14  That he who wishes grace, nor runs to thee,
15  His aspirations without wings would fly.

13  Donna, se' tanto grande e tanto vali,
14  che qual vuol grazia e a te non ricorre,
15  sua disïanza vuol volar sanz' ali.

16  Not only thy benignity gives succour
17  To him who asketh it, but oftentimes
18  Forerunneth of its own accord the asking.

16  La tua benignità non pur soccorre
17  a chi domanda, ma molte fïate
18  liberamente al dimandar precorre.

19  In thee compassion is, in thee is pity,
20  In thee magnificence; in thee unites
21  Whate'er of goodness is in any creature.

19  In te misericordia, in te pietate,
20  in te magnificenza, in te s'aduna
21  quantunque in creatura è di bontate.

22  Now doth this man, who from the lowest depth
23  Of the universe as far as here has seen
24  One after one the spiritual lives,

22  Or questi, che da l'infima lacuna
23  de l'universo infin qui ha vedute
24  le vite spiritali ad una ad una,

25  Supplicate thee through grace for so much power
26  That with his eyes he may uplift himself
27  Higher towards the uttermost salvation.

25  supplica a te, per grazia, di virtute
26  tanto, che possa con li occhi levarsi
27  più alto verso l'ultima salute.

28  And I, who never burned for my own seeing
29  More than I do for his, all of my prayers
30  Proffer to thee, and pray they come not short,

28  E io, che mai per mio veder non arsi
29  più ch'i' fo per lo suo, tutti miei prieghi
30  ti porgo, e priego che non sieno scarsi,

31  That thou wouldst scatter from him every cloud
32  Of his mortality so with thy prayers,
33  That the Chief Pleasure be to him displayed.

31  perché tu ogne nube li disleghi
32 di sua mortalità co' prieghi tuoi,
33 sì che 'l sommo piacer li si dispieghi.

34  Still farther do I pray thee, Queen, who canst
35  Whate'er thou wilt, that sound thou mayst preserve
36  After so great a vision his affections.

34  Ancor ti priego, regina, che puoi
35 ciò che tu vuoli, che conservi sani,
36 dopo tanto veder, li affetti suoi.
37  Let thy protection conquer human movements;
38  See Beatrice and all the blessed ones
39  My prayers to second clasp their hands to thee!"

37  Vinca tua guardia i movimenti umani:
38  vedi Beatrice con quanti beati
39  per li miei prieghi ti chiudon le mani!”

40  The eyes beloved and revered of God,
41  Fastened upon the speaker, showed to us
42  How grateful unto her are prayers devout;

40  Li occhi da Dio diletti e venerati,
41  fissi ne l'orator, ne dimostraro
42  quanto i devoti prieghi le son grati;

43  Then unto the Eternal Light they turned,
44  On which it is not credible could be
45  By any creature bent an eye so clear.

43  indi a l'etterno lume s'addrizzaro,
44  nel qual non si dee creder che s'invii
45  per creatura l'occhio tanto chiaro.

46   And I, who to the end of all desires
47  Was now approaching, even as I ought
48  The ardour of desire within me ended.

46  E io ch'al fine di tutt' i disii
46  appropinquava, sì com' io dovea,
47  l'ardor del desiderio in me finii.

49  Bernard was beckoning unto me, and smiling,
50  That I should upward look; but I already
51  Was of my own accord such as he wished;

49  Bernardo m'accennava, e sorridea,
50  perch' io guardassi suso; ma io era
51  già per me stesso tal qual ei volea:

52  Because my sight, becoming purified,
53  Was entering more and more into the ray
54  Of the High Light which of itself is true.

52  ché la mia vista, venendo sincera,
53  e più e più intrava per lo raggio
54  de l'alta luce che da sé è vera.

55  From that time forward what I saw was greater
56  Than our discourse, that to such vision yields,
57  And yields the memory unto such excess.

55  Da quinci innanzi il mio veder fu maggio
56  che 'l parlar mostra, ch'a tal vista cede,
57  e cede la memoria a tanto oltraggio.

58  Even as he is who seeth in a dream,
59  And after dreaming the imprinted passion
60  Remains, and to his mind the rest returns not,

58  Qual è colüi che sognando vede,
59  che dopo 'l sogno la passione impressa
60  rimane, e l'altro a la mente non riede,

61  Even such am I, for almost utterly
62  Ceases my vision, and distilleth yet
63  Within my heart the sweetness born of it;

61  cotal son io, ché quasi tutta cessa
62  mia visïone, e ancor mi distilla
63  nel core il dolce che nacque da essa.

64  Even thus the snow is in the sun unsealed,
65  Even thus upon the wind in the light leaves
66  Were the soothsayings of the Sibyl lost.

64  Così la neve al sol si disigilla;
65  così al vento ne le foglie levi
66  si perdea la sentenza di Sibilla.

67  O Light Supreme, that dost so far uplift thee
68  From the conceits of mortals, to my mind
69  Of what thou didst appear re-lend a little,

67  O somma luce che tanto ti levi
68  da' concetti mortali, a la mia mente
69  ripresta un poco di quel che parevi,

70  And make my tongue of so great puissance,
71  That but a single sparkle of thy glory
72  It may bequeath unto the future people;

70  e fa la lingua mia tanto possente,
71  ch'una favilla sol de la tua gloria
72  possa lasciare a la futura gente;

73  For by returning to my memory somewhat,
74  And by a little sounding in these verses,
75  More of thy victory shall be conceived!

73  ché, per tornare alquanto a mia memoria
74  e per sonare un poco in questi versi,
75  più si conceperà di tua vittoria.

76  I think the keenness of the living ray
77  Which I endured would have bewildered me,
78  If but mine eyes had been averted from it;

76  Io credo, per l'acume ch'io soffersi
77  del vivo raggio, ch'i' sarei smarrito,
78  se li occhi miei da lui fossero aversi.

79  And I remember that I was more bold
80  On this account to bear, so that I joined
81  My aspect with the Glory Infinite.

79  E' mi ricorda ch'io fui più ardito
80  per questo a sostener, tanto ch'i' giunsi
81  l'aspetto mio col valore infinito.

82  O grace abundant, by which I presumed
83  To fix my sight upon the Light Eternal,
84  So that the seeing I consumed therein!

82  Oh abbondante grazia ond' io presunsi
83  ficcar lo viso per la luce etterna,
84  tanto che la veduta vi consunsi!

85  I saw that in its depth far down is lying
86  Bound up with love together in one volume,
87  What through the universe in leaves is scattered;

85  Nel suo profondo vidi che s'interna,
86  legato con amore in un volume,
87  ciò che per l'universo si squaderna:

88  Substance, and accident, and their operations,
89  All interfused together in such wise
90  That what I speak of is one simple light.

88  sustanze e accidenti e lor costume
89  quasi conflati insieme, per tal modo
90  che ciò ch'i' dico è un semplice lume.

91  The universal fashion of this knot
92  Methinks I saw, since more abundantly
93  In saying this I feel that I rejoice.

91  La forma universal di questo nodo
92  credo ch'i' vidi, perché più di largo,
93  dicendo questo, mi sento ch'i' godo.

94  One moment is more lethargy to me,
95  Than five and twenty centuries to the emprise
96  That startled Neptune with the shade of Argo!

94  Un punto solo m'è maggior letargo
95  che venticinque secoli a la 'mpresa
96  che fé Nettuno ammirar l'ombra d'Argo.

97  My mind in this wise wholly in suspense,
98  Steadfast, immovable, attentive gazed,
99  And evermore with gazing grew enkindled.

97  Così la mente mia, tutta sospesa
98  mirava fissa, immobile e attenta,
99 e sempre di mirar faceasi accesa.

100  In presence of that light one such becomes,
101  That to withdraw therefrom for other prospect
102  It is impossible he e'er consent;

100  A quella luce cotal si diventa,
101  che volgersi da lei per altro aspetto
102  è impossibil che mai si consenta;
103  Because the good, which object is of will,
104  Is gathered all in this, and out of it
105  That is defective which is perfect there.

103  però che 'l ben, ch'è del volere obietto,
104  tutto s'accoglie in lei, e fuor di quella
105  è defettivo ciò ch'è lì perfetto.

106  Shorter henceforward will my language fall
107  Of what I yet remember, than an infant's
108  Who still his tongue doth moisten at the breast.

106  Omai sarà più corta mia favella,
107  pur a quel ch'io ricordo, che d'un fante
108  che bagni ancor la lingua a la mammella.

109  Not because more than one unmingled semblance
110  Was in the living light on which I looked,
111  For it is always what it was before;

109  Non perché più ch'un semplice sembiante
110  fosse nel vivo lume ch'io mirava,
111  che tal è sempre qual s'era davante;

112  But through the sight, that fortified itself
113  In me by looking, one appearance only
114  To me was ever changing as I changed.

112  ma per la vista che s'avvalorava
113  in me guardando, una sola parvenza,
114  mutandom' io, a me si travagliava.

115  Within the deep and luminous subsistence
116  Of the High Light appeared to me three circles,
117  Of threefold colour and of one dimension,

115  Ne la profonda e chiara sussistenza
116  de l'alto lume parvermi tre giri
117  di tre colori e d'una contenenza;

118  And by the second seemed the first reflected
119  As Iris is by Iris, and the third
120  Seemed fire that equally from both is breathed.

118  e l'un da l'altro come iri da iri
119  parea reflesso, e 'l terzo parea foco
120  che quinci e quindi igualmente si spiri.

121  O how all speech is feeble and falls short
122  Of my conceit, and this to what I saw
123  Is such, 'tis not enough to call it little!

121  Oh quanto è corto il dire e come fioco
122  al mio concetto! e questo, a quel ch'i' vidi,
123  è tanto, che non basta a dicer “poco.”

124  O Light Eterne, sole in thyself that dwellest,
125  Sole knowest thyself, and, known unto thyself
126  And knowing, lovest and smilest on thyself!

124  O luce etterna che sola in te sidi,
125  sola t'intendi, e da te intelletta
126  e intendente te ami e arridi!

127  That circulation, which being thus conceived
128  Appeared in thee as a reflected light,
129  When somewhat contemplated by mine eyes,

127  Quella circulazion che sì concetta
128  pareva in te come lume reflesso,
129  da li occhi miei alquanto circunspetta,

130  Within itself, of its own very colour
131  Seemed to me painted with our effigy,
132  Wherefore my sight was all absorbed therein.

130  dentro da sé, del suo colore stesso,
131  mi parve pinta de la nostra effige:
132  per che 'l mio viso in lei tutto era messo.

133  As the geometrician, who endeavours
134  To square the circle, and discovers not,
135  By taking thought, the principle he wants,

133  Qual è 'l geomètra che tutto s'affige
134  per misurar lo cerchio, e non ritrova,
135  pensando, quel principio ond' elli indige,

136  Even such was I at that new apparition;
137  I wished to see how the image to the circle
138  Conformed itself, and how it there finds place;

136  tal era io a quella vista nova:
137  veder voleva come si convenne
138  l'imago al cerchio e come vi s'indova;

139  But my own wings were not enough for this,
140  Had it not been that then my mind there smote
141  A flash of lightning, wherein came its wish.

139  ma non eran da ciò le proprie penne:
140  se non che la mia mente fu percossa
141  da un fulgore in che sua voglia venne.

142  Here vigour failed the lofty fantasy:
143  But now was turning my desire and will,
144  Even as a wheel that equally is moved,

142  A l'alta fantasia qui mancò possa;
143  ma già volgeva il mio disio e 'l velle,
144  sì come rota ch'igualmente è mossa,

145  The Love which moves the sun and other stars.

145  l'amor che move il sole e l'altre stelle.

SIX SONNETS ON DANTE’S DIVINE COMEDY BY HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW
(1807-1882)
I
Oft have I seen at some cathedral door
    A laborer, pausing in the dust and heat,
    Lay down his burden, and with reverent feet
    Enter, and cross himself, and on the floor
Kneel to repeat his paternoster o’er;
    Far off the noises of the world retreat;
    The loud vociferations of the street
    Become an undistinguishable roar.
So, as I enter here from day to day,
    And leave my burden at this minster gate,
    Kneeling in prayer, and not ashamed to pray,
The tumult of the time disconsolate
    To inarticulate murmurs dies away,
    While the eternal ages watch and wait.
II
How strange the sculptures that adorn these towers!
    This crowd of statues, in whose folded sleeves
    Birds build their nests; while canopied with leaves
    Parvis and portal bloom like trellised bowers,
And the vast minster seems a cross of flowers!
    But fiends and dragons on the gargoyled eaves
    Watch the dead Christ between the living thieves,
    And, underneath, the traitor Judas lowers!
Ah! from what agonies of heart and brain,
    What exultations trampling on despair,
    What tenderness, what tears, what hate of wrong,
What passionate outcry of a soul in pain,
    Uprose this poem of the earth and air,
    This mediaeval miracle of song!
III
I enter, and I see thee in the gloom
    Of the long aisles, O poet saturnine!
    And strive to make my steps keep pace with thine.
    The air is filled with some unknown perfume;
The congregation of the dead make room
    For thee to pass; the votive tapers shine;
    Like rooks that haunt Ravenna’s groves of pine,
    The hovering echoes fly from tomb to tomb.
From the confessionals I hear arise
    Rehearsals of forgotten tragedies,
    And lamentations from the crypts below
And then a voice celestial that begins
    With the pathetic words, “Although your sins
    As scarlet be,” and ends with “as the snow.”
IV
With snow-white veil, and garments as of flame,
    She stands before thee, who so long ago
    Filled thy young heart with passion and the woe
    From which thy song in all its splendors came;
And while with stern rebuke she speaks thy name,
    The ice about thy heart melts as the snow
    On mountain heights, and in swift overflow
    Comes gushing from thy lips in sobs of shame.
Thou makest full confession; and a gleam
    As of the dawn on some dark forest cast,
    Seems on thy lifted forehead to increase;
Lethe and Eunoe—the remembered dream
    And the forgotten sorrow—bring at last
    That perfect pardon which is perfect peace.
V
I Lift mine eyes, and all the windows blaze
    With forms of saints and holy men who died,
    Here martyred and hereafter glorified;
    And the great Rose upon its leaves displays
Christ’s Triumph, and the angelic roundelays,
    With splendor upon splendor multiplied;
    And Beatrice again at Dante’s side
    No more rebukes, but smiles her words of praise.
And then the organ sounds, and unseen choirs
    Sing the old Latin hymns of peace and love
    And benedictions of the Holy Ghost;
And the melodious bells among the spires
    O’er all the house-tops and through heaven above
    Proclaim the elevation of the Host!
VI
O star of morning and of liberty!
    O bringer of the light, whose splendor shines
    Above the darkness of the Apennines,
    Forerunner of the day that is to be!
The voices of the city and the sea,
    The voices of the mountains and the pines,
    Repeat thy song, till the familiar lines
    Are footpaths for the thought of Italy!
Thy fame is blown abroad from all the heights,
    Through all the nations; and a sound is heard,
    As of a mighty wind, and men devout,
Strangers of Rome, and the new proselytes,
    In their own language hear thy wondrous word,
    And many are amazed and many doubt.
























 

















 







  






 





