PLAY

Canticle I: Prostration
Canticle II: Progression
Canticle III: Procreation

Canticle One: Prostration

Canto I
Stop.  Do not listen, do not read, do not step
Where your first step is your last,
Where your next will be a plunge
To fiery seas.  And yet, what should one do
When one's pursued?  Punchy and Paunchy,
The clowning twins of time,
Drunk with old age fatigue,
Keep mumbling nonsense keeping you awake.
You swear you have not slept,
Yet nothing but a nightmare could have stalked you
With such persistent howling fear and need.  
The beasts inside you have escaped control,
And like a face which faces you you see 
Your old professor of philosophy, 
Who warned you when youth's hormones said: Don't listen:
Thou shalt not multiply entities without reason.
Now he appears, ensnared in thorny vines, your most
Revered purveyor of outworn ethics,
A critter gnawing off his own hurt foot
To cheat the jaw-toothed trap of his own thinking.
He gets out of the trap — too gruesomely — 
And, limping, runs about in sanguine circles.
He thrashes round and round in his big thicket,
Scaring up smaller game for languid readers,
Who hunt for silly pleasures in the dark.
At last he stops, stops just where he had started,
Sits idly on a stump, and ruminates.
Inside the stump the termite theologians
Feel the vibrations of an alien thinker,
And run amok in multi-legged awe.
You want to cry: Stop!  Stop! — but they keep crawling,
Eating the letters of words right out of your brain,
And turning meaning into senseless sawdust.
Thus the philosopher, through his digressions,
Stirs up a hoard of ancient appetites.
He takes his foot from his mouth, and logically coughs,
His talk made gruff from years and years of smoking,
And slowed to a crawl by his East Texas drawl:
Un-purposeful projects eddy in midstream,
The energy flow is trapped in ceaseless whirl,
And purposed proposals die in incompletion. 
The many entities of your wakin' dream
Pullulate nippin' mites below the skin,
Your blood in flux with insect irritations.
He looks where the ghost of his smoking foot should be,
And tries to scratch away the theologians.
He claws the air as if he could not stop
That which provokes him just as he provokes.
Now you remember why you liked him so —
He was the master of allusions.
Horatio dreams his inquiescent dreams,
And ghosts rise from their graves
And walk in air.  The prince and king,
Are dead.  Long live the sting!  And the prince's
Paramore has drowned herself,
Wrapped in her petalled messages of spring,
While the queen stood by, and in full sympathy,
Watched till her sing-song suicide was complete — 
The song she sang stopped only by death's stoppage.
Autumn has come, the leaves fall from the trees,
And the perfumes of their deaths go up in smoke.
What are you doin' with the life you lead?
The professor, foot in hand, raised like a torch,
Says, with a snort that echoes from these steeps:
If you're puttin' your best foot forward,
You're bound to slip.  Time's choreography
Cripples audacious dancers.  Forget that swan squawk.
Stop — retract your steps.  Return now to the verge,
And stare straight down.  That's where you're headed
On this plunge you've chosen.  Thus spake
The oracle, the Dumb of Tweedle Don't, 
Through wads of blackening fumes which show no spark,
And from this dark the philosopher's voice pours forth:
The ocean's depth consumes the mountain's height.
The skeletal rags of poverty suit you best,
No clothes for tides to catch and pull you down,
No name for the swimmer flailin' round and round.
He lights his foot, inhales, and puffs smoke rings.
They rise and wobble, unspool, disperse in sound.
Grow gills, my friend, or else you're gonna drown.   
I wake up with a start, stare at the clock,
See nothing but that bloody, empty trap,
An apnea of breath, an inhaled snore,
A pulse that stops, a breathless, drowning moment.
The night is now too late, the day too early,
And every vision of a promised dawn
Presents an infant, premature and blue,
And silent as a corpse in putrefaction.
His clogged and pulsing, long umbilical 
Does not stretch back to any mother's womb,
Nor does it spiral forward to a tomb,
But round and round his little throat it knots,
As if the blood inside its pulsing tube
Were that of every possible generation.
They try to squeeze all history from a throat
Destined to be too immature to speak,
Though all their pains and joys will prompt it to. 
The darkness of the night is consecrated 
With clanking chains that spark as they recede
To lurk in corners where neglected dust,
Composed of my shed skin now covers them.
The grid lines of the ceiling's spider webs,
Like broken squares of dated calendars,
Sag in the harrowed darkness with weird promise.
I do not ask what time, what day it is,
But what is this dry pelf of grease and skin,
Less solid than the smoke of this strange world
Where all of Nature's constants are suspended,
And strange geographies teem with stranger lives
In parallel motion to these dreams which dog me?
Somewhere, outside, in this suburban enclave,
A dog is barking codes of loneliness,
And in the wetlands, yet to float more houses,
A coyote yips and mocks his trained trapped cousin.
The only other sounds that scar the night
Are those of traffic, whose fracas never stops,
And from this smothering uproar of black noise,
A solo siren winds its judgement horn.
A man inside this ambulance expires,
His hurt heart thudding to a final stop.
I did not know him, and I cannot care,
And yet I breathe the air of his demise.
Something is scratching underneath the floor.
I hear, but do not listen.  I've been warned.
This is the thing you are, the world you feel,
A haggard face incised with what's forlorn.
Skin burns, but old loose teeth are chattering,
Your lips pulled back into a frightened snarl,
The beasts you've eaten wake, and come for you,
The coyote gnaws those dust clots in the corners,
And all your appetites arise en masse,
Poised like a wave above your pillow's drool,
The great Tsunami of your tortured past,
Breaking upon your head, within your heart,
And loosing from your mouth your tongue's sad moan,
A cough, a yawn, a belch, a burning throat,
"I ate too late, too much, when will I learn?"
That's always the refrain of your sad tune,
Wondering why you do the things you do.
A cancer growth of narratives ensues,
All of them interrupting one another,
Some agonizing in their own devices,
And some, whose voices rise out of that din,
Almost like whispers from some world of light,
As fine and glorious as it seems unreal.
Some few are laughing, though they feel
Great sorrow, but sorrow that is coming to an end.
These voices clamoring so cacophonously
Are too parental in their tiresome tirades,
And I, or you, as now the case might be,
Say to this darkness, blaring down on us,
Maybe I'll calm myself, and fall asleep,
By finding something comforting to read.

Canto II
You understand, this took place in autumn,
At the time of the great fires, when the air
Turned foul and brown, the sky a latrine
For the sickness of our folly.  In those days,
Food came wrapped in imperishable trash,
And sometime after midnight, when the moon
Was veiled by smoke to an umber grin,
I just stepped out to throw trash in the bin ... 
And that's when I saw him.  Like lightning,
Up he sprang as I sprang in.  I slammed the door,
My heart a jellied trymboling of fear.
I suppose that first mystspell was a sobtell hint,
Of all the medfright medness yet to vent. 
Thereafter I privately called the incident
The Great Skunk Face-off.  It was
Not my first, but would it be my last?  
He was already elaborating
His warning ritual: foot-stamping, hissing,
His striped tail, high, aquiver, 
His terrified posture threatening my threat,
And yet — he did not spray — whew! but yes, that's when I knew
That the history of the world's history — 
And mine — could not be told, unless it were told
In the language of its odors, and what Muse
In the pantheon of Muses, inspires breath
For that?  And yet, it was then, that I became
Aware that my insomnia had allowed my
Body to enter the pantheon of nocturnal creatures,
The urban ones: rats, possums, coyotes,
Raccoons, bats — and they spoke to me — 
Through the language of my fear —  of their ancient
Philosophy of need.  You laugh, but yours
Will be trifling laughter, because a shock
Comes first, when laughter is authentic.
You have not yet learned to be calm
When confronting a skunk.  I beg 
You to listen, to breathe, to read my stink,
To be that Muse who steps out of the future,
And returns in your eyeless cloud of the unknowing,
To complete the circuit and requite my love.
And what will you say, my Love, my Blessèd one?
To enkindle my ardor for this burning need,
More animal than angel, but angel-animal,
Like a bat in the cave of the brain,
Rabid to flee the stony skull of reason.
What will you say to prepare me for this war
I am always waging with the fire's smoke,
Fighting to acclimate my lungs to toxins,
And to set my tongue ablaze like a burning city?
This I will say, my lover of vaporous mazes.
You are the culmination of a lineage,
Born in the lives of the living, and comprising
The lives of the dead.   Sound may deceive,
And visions may be false, but scent is veracious
And incorruptible, and of all the portals
Into mentation's palace, this is the one
That restores dead memory to the time
When the ashen forest was pine perfume.
It was then that my lover plucked my eyes
From my head, and placed them in a casket
Of lost starlight.  It was then that she
Took the lead of my thick tongue, and replaced it
With the perfume of her words.  Follow me
Now with your feet of clodded marl,
Follow me down the warrens of the lost,
And I will show you punishments and crimes,
Which eyes of flesh could never tolerate,
Down where the gossamers of broken webs
Are woven again for the shrouds of vaporous verbs.
I will show you how to wake in the depths of sleep,
And how to weave silk cordage from your nerves.
And I said.  Spare me.  Let me live in fear.
But let me live, I will not venture down
These stinking tunnels.  And she said: Listen.
Read.  Obey my voice.  The funniest aphorisms
Are made holy by the profundity of humiliation.
Your up is down, and my high down is up.
Hearing, you do not listen, reading, you do not see.
My texts demand an ardent exegesis,
A movement of the mind within the gut,
A deep surrender to paralysis
That grips the source of action in its stillness.
The sound of the ambulance siren in the night,
The yelp of the coyote, the squeak of the hungry rat,
The bat's infectious urine infecting air,
The disingenuous possum's bristling hair,
The luminous crimson of the raccoon's stare,
The traffic that will never stop nor care.
These things which trigger cardio infarctions
Cannot be purged from body or from mind,
Until you feel the feeling that connects
The outcast to the center of the mass,
The night to day, the animal to human.
Cold air, like tears, trends down, and you are cold,
Your numbness an ambiguous moral cloud,
Which can't discern what's good from what is evil,
Nor can you see how darkness harbors light.
As crucifying frost becomes fresh dew,
Each drop the impulse of the morning sun,
So shall the frozen stiffness of your neck,
Now blighted by your arduous cowardice,
Be raised to glory by obedience.
I could not see, 
But I could smell her tears, their tranquil lake
Gracing her hill of talk, and quenching
The noxious babble of my thought.  I could not hear,
But I could sense her words, like the stirring
Of burnt seeds in sodden cinders.  And I could
Feel the motions of her wings,
Ragged and beckoning and full of darkness.
Yes, there was promise in those subtle whispers,
As irresistible as sun to blooms, and I became
A slave to that perfume.  Now without meaning to,
Or wanting to, I fell down like a child on all fours,
My hands like claws that dug their own dank burrow.
And trundling like a polecat seeking safety, 
Silence like dirt encumbering my ears, 
Both blind and deaf, I bent my will to hers, 
My only guide the snake of her brown scent.

Canto III
We are what's flowing through, what's passing over.
We are the rivering grain in your walls' dead wood.
We are the microscopic hordes of vermin,
Whose appetites teem through your dumps of broken joys.
Who said that?  What do you mean?
Where's your credentials?  
As if you, the illiterate, deaf-mute,
Could read from our ocean of sighs the signs of the time.
As if you, asleep in your sensate caldera of ice,
Could return to our clairvoyant mode of being.
You have always been so cognitively subnormal,
Which is why you've been elected for these tortures.
You know the nonsensical pleasures of obsession,
And you can follow the model train of thought
Without getting bored by its chow-chew circulations.
You know how to close your ears to common threats,
How to shut your eyes to vulgar consternations.
You know how to bloat the balloon of superfluous debts,
And how to slip the noose for their collection. 
You know how to breathe under water,
How to bathe in fire, 
And how to make yourself invisible.
You know how to suckle the gruel of your own complaints,
And how to foment hydrophobic drool.
You know how to run in circles and chase your tail,
And you know how to milk your fleas for your own blood,
And how to catch that hemorrhage in a pail.
You know how to bitch, and how to spray your stench, 
And you know how to snap the shackles of control. 
Your personhood has always been a question,
So you're idiot enough to drink our poison.
It's nothing personal, but it's intimate,
And this is the IT we want you to imbibe.
The autistic baby alone in your grandfather's Alzheimer’s,
We are trying to ease the sting of your existence
Without the irrelevant data of existence.
Whoever you are, you have always been half extinct,
Always half limb, and half pure amputation,
And the hole is the half who is speaking to you now,
The half which has heard, which has read, 
Which has always seen, even before your need
To understand.  You who could never juggle
This single split, how could you keep three knives
In the air at once, or catch the meaning
Of the fourth in flight?  Too few or too much,
You have never known just right.  Last night — now why
Is it always last night, and never tonight? —
Why is tomorrow always destroying the Now? —
Last night, I was shocked awake by the sound of digging,
The New-Speak of my eczema screaming: Scratch me!
And I looked out the window of my peerless house,
And saw in the midst of my ordered suburbia,
Right in the middle of my garden's beautiful grid,
This refugee mother shoveling through my roses,
And digging a shallow grave for her unborn child.
'Hey!  'Get out of there!'  I shouted.  'Where in the hell
Did you come from? and what are you doing?'
She stopped, looked up, and with a one-eyed stare,
She stuck her oral probe in the mouth of my ear,
And opened a wound in the closed lid of my eye.
I am preparing a bed for your innocence,
And here I will squat and give birth to Naiveté, 
The child you have planted in my womb,
Who will die the very instant she is born,
So that you can nurse, with the secular sand
Of your boar-tits, the bloody material mess
Of the afterbirth.  That's when I lost It,
Whatever that It is, and those gadflies
That were buzzing beneath my skin
Broke out and swarmed in frets of waspish rage, 
I banged on the opaque wall with my glass fists,
And shattered the frangible brown with my cracked fit.
"Don't you know who I am?  I am rich!
I can salt and bite you!"  And she said,
You are not young.  "I am rich," I cried, "do you
Even know what that means?"  And she said, 
You are not handsome.  "I can have any
Woman I want, you loathsome whore!
I can sell and buy your entire vermiculture.
One word from me, and that fleece in your eyes,
Which tries to swaddle me in wooly lies,
Will whirl away in rotaries of blindness.
You are a beggar's bastard, a witch's bitch."
And she said, You are not witty, nor brave,
Nor candid.  But I kept shouting: "Rich!
Rich! Rich! Rich! Rich!" until my words were ashes
In my mouth, and my tongue was a mound
Of ashes crushing my heart.  Something passed
Through me with feeble palpitations,
And I found myself in an ambulance, on a gurney,
The din of its siren stabbing my stopped ears.
Enough.  I knew I was dead, yet the wailing
Kept on bleating.  I knew I was not yet dead,
But I wanted to be.  Why can't I just go to sleep,
Like normal people, who sleep both night
And day, and die and breathe, exactly like water,
Unmixed, in life's rivers of blood?  Why can't 
I laugh in the midst of these Kosmikomics?
And amuse myself with that joke that Punchy and Paunchy
Keep passing between themselves with childish glee,
While singing their refrain of me me me.
Why? Why? Why? Why? Why?  And she said,
Losing her voice as her hole sank deeper,
Because your Y is the fork of your branching thighs,
And you can't decide which leg would dare step next.
After, her silence thundered, and I wept.
I was losing the only woman I could love,
And now I was a nomad and an orphan,
Stuck in the boundless space of my desert ocean,
And buried by the wind-swept dunes of tides.
How could I move? and what could ever move me?
With this corpse who cannot pass through,
Who cannot pass over, with this sleepless
Microbial glitch in his amputations,
Which will not cease their insect calculations,
'Though their zeros keep mounting higher in that dump
Where my joys keep oozing their ceaseless permutations,
Replacing with castings the wood in the last tree's stump.
How can I put my philosophic rump on this throne
That roars with their theological munching,
Or shake new dreams out of my nightmare's coma?
Or drink from the trough of a dead baptismal sump
The hallucinogenic squirt of the night's scared skunk?
How can I be what no one has ever been?  O,   
You who have never loved me, guide me now,
My child is augering down to the pit of birth,
And the voice of his mother is a shovel's monotony
Which digs digs digs digs digs its song of sorrow,
As if in the itch of my vermillion skin,
The ghost of Its rose rose up from my cratering garden.

Canto IV
Barking abruptly through a mundane moment —
An everyday conversation — a thunderous
Instant of inattention, as when a sentence starts,
But in the muddle, I simply forget where I'm going ... 
Going... irretrievably ... gone ... and ... and ...
What's this?  Eyes glued shut as when at 4 a.m., 
One feels one's mind pouring in swift descent 
From the crest of the highest sleep, great sheets of water,
Like turbines of frozen smoke, twisting, falling, 
Their cascades shattered to drops, each of which 
Flashes the image of a dream, faces I 
Do not know, incognizant in shadow, faces
I feel as sighings — echoing, rising, crescendoing,
Re-crescendoing — my own face torn 
In a million iterations — infants, 
Women, hordes of cringing men, all falling, pausing, 
Cacophonously moaning, the wells
Of my pores erupting in beads of sweat.
I cannot hold it together, yet something pools,
And in the darkness hearing engenders seeing.
Blink, blink, and I am back ... or am I?  
Narcolepsy?  Well, that is my cyber
Self-diagnosis, but no one sees me leaving
Or returning, and that mundane moment,
Stretched to interminable length, for others
Does not exist, the gap and escape from Time
Were solely mine.  I find my head conversing 
With a doctor, not knowing how I got here,
And blankly staring.  He speaks.  "L. Roy's the name,
Not Elroy, the L. stands for Leisure, 
My father had a sense of humor, I go by 'L',
Or 'Doctor', you understand."  I didn't.
"It might have been worse, my mother
Wanted to call me 'orrible Labor,
On account of my breach presentation ... 
A stubborn birth.  You understand."  I didn't.
"The blood is strong you know, the world
Depends on mothers.  You understand."
I di ... da ...  "Listen, do you know why you're here?"
I didn't.  "You've wandered off the path."
A fly lights on his nose; he flicks it off.
It falls; it struggles, stunned.  It rights itself.
He crushes it with his thumb.  It rights itself.
He crushes it again.  A curious fellow this.
"Obstinate little bugger, don't you think?"
I didn't.  I didn't think that is.  "Time is a prison
And old age the last deprivation, the fatal
Knell ... "  The fly revived again, and whirled away.
"Damn it!" he said.  "I had him, now I've missed him.
I violate my hypocritic oath."  
He shakes his head.  He laughs.  "I make a joke."
Then turning to me again, "You have escaped.
That is the cause of your symptoms, or 
As we say in our specie-ality:
 
All night long the monkey sits
Striving to reach the coconut 
Of the moon."

He laughed.  "Astrologically, of course, the moon
Is a corpse.  The wind keeps pummeling the skull,  
And the monkey moans.  You understand.
You don't?  Listen: My job is to make the simple
Complex, and the complex infinitely
Incomprehensible."  He laughed.  I didn't.
The doctor had a long, lined, equine face,
One of the Horses of Instruction, as Blake might say. 
He had a bald, encephalously bloated crown, 
With a ring of straggling hairs around his ears.
One of the young born old, as you might say.
A curious fellow, if you think about it.  You
Don't.  But I digress.  The harmonious
Order of your lack of thinking is never
Inharmoniously mixed with wit.  You 
Never jest with passion, and so thick
Masses darken your path through life,
And turn all springs to autumn.  You 
Understand?  You don't.  No matter.  
The Doctor is staring at you, he cocks
His head.  "Treatment is symptomatic, 
There is no cure."  He laughs.  "You
Won't understand.  No matter.  I make
A joke.  His face goes flat.  "I now am going to fit you 
With these googgles.  They are virtually
Painless.  I make another joke.  If everyone
Killed flies, they would bite less.  But the obstinate
Flies would fly, and bite less too.  You 
Understand."  He puts the goggles on me,
And I saw.  At first a buzzing swarm, 
And then a coagulation into figures.
A voice-over says: "Ephemeromorphs,
The lowest, lying forms of life, the forty farty
Figures of History.  These gaseous presences
Can barely pass the smell test.  And now you're one
Of them: They dub thee: Dupe.  You understand."
I didn't.  But I saw.  Oh it was a large, illustrious
Crowd which gathered there, all larding one another
With fat praise.  They strolled about 
In academic ease, resplendent
In their infinite accolades, such darlings
Suspended in Absurdia.  And I was one.
Yes, I was one of them, the emeritus 
Of the future, the Dupe of Time,
The goose whose feathers fall away in flight,
And sprinkle lice upon the heads below.
But oh my feet were heavy with Time's 
Feats, and I was dazzled to distraction
In the presence of all this spoilage of dead flies — 
I wished to fix their names in fame's
Clear amber.  Then the voice in my head
Repeated this cold mantra: "It is a slow,
Slow gradual climb to the depths of feeling,
A mortification of poetic punishments.
It is the sad path down of gravitas,
Where no one ever laughs, or loves,
Or sings.  You are the chosen one,
You are the No One.  The one who doesn't,
Who never, understands." 

Canto V
Stop.  The curtain rises.  What is this curse?
Some call it coma, some call it something worse.
But all can see that brown is turning black,
Like a bruise that shines with its own muted light,
And twists all verbiage into senseless yakking. 
The phenomenon, upon close examination,
Resembles some kind of Rococo opera house,
Where tier after tear of putti lift gilded boxes
To wrap around and crowd the proscenium.
Here is the Cythera of tragic trysts, where all
The disloyal lovers in tattered gowns
And ragged tuxedos lie after the performance,
Just as they lied to each other during it.
Ghost voices moaning in operatic wails
Assault the ears of the examiners,
The ears of the lonely who long for licentious touch,
To break the lawful boundaries of their skin.  Stop.
This is you.  And in your breathless story,
Your words, the unspoken ones, the amputations,
Go swirling around the theater like flocks of birds,
Which over the decades have somehow gotten in,
And for all their frenzy cannot get out again.
There was a time when all of them were sparrows,
Those Biblical blips of the Monster's love of detail ...
But now they whirl around in vortical bands
Of starry, ephemeral colors, their feathers
Burning with those lusty fires, which char
No celibate, but scorch all lovers.  Stop.  This is you,
This pendulum's rotation, defining 
In its pulse the frontiers of a madness
Which spurt from the loins and spin to the edge of death.
But this is the death of secondary selves,
A death that draws a thread out of the chaos,
And hangs on its chain of hours, the sweat
Of remorse.  How many times, in your wretched
Insomnia, have you thought yourself awake?
How many times have you pondered your deceptions?
The count proceeds to nine, then dies at ten,
An incompletion going round again ...
An incompletion going round again ...  Enough.
You have deliberated long enough, 
And now the time has come to take that step,
That step which is your first step and your last,
That incremental twitching in your thighs
That moves you past some precipice's verge,
In which the steep velocity of your urgings,
Whines in your ears and steals your breath away,
The plots of all the operas in the world
One streaming blur of steaming vomitus.
All of the theater's gilding is tainted now,
And the putti with all their arrows of penetration,
Have turned to coots and hags as black as crows,
The venereal tellers of tales which cannot be true.
This is you, the confessor and confessed, 
The male and female sides of scavenger selves,
And one of them sings in a piercing coloratura
For you to stop and listen.  She ends her aria,
And retches the recitative.  Bent over, pale,
Streamers of acid spittle strung from her lips,
She straightens, wipes mouth with wrist, 
Closes her eyes, speaks: One slanders 
Oneself on this terrible heartless stage,
But can one say that one conspires, plots, 
Contrives to slander oneself?  Or does one
Merely act maliciously from a temporary
Shudder of disgust?  The woman carries
Your child, but does not bring forth,
And like undigested food, your possible birth,
Becomes a tiny skeleton in her womb.
Be fierce in defending your own calm sanctuary,
Be fierce in keeping your fetal self entombed.
She has a mountainous coif, from which a feather,
Like the skeleton of a tree on a granite peak,
Draws the eye up and out of range of speech.
This must be the examiner's way of searching,
The way to make sense of this surreal sensorium,
And whatever else this weirdness happens to be,
In the windy artifice of its lamentations,
This is not you — or is it?  — questioning.
"Who are you, Madam, and what have you come
To say?"  I am the lust of the reckless adolescent,
The infidelity of the mother, the dithering
Folly of the crone.  I am the praise
That turns to slander, the accolade
That spoils into jeers.  I am the expert
Touting naiveté.  I am the adept,
Who dies, but lives again, in the ABC's
Of an inorganic witchcraft.  I am pornography’s
Bitter artful bait, the destructive impulse
That masks its taste with reason.  I am you.
Stop.  Stop.  I am the empirical
Certification of your extinction,
The danger lurking in your arrogance.
"You go too far."  I have not gone far enough.
I say, persuade by sensuous degrees,
And not by these slogan-bludgeons.  I say that the artifice
In disciplined art, can raise the curtain of possibilities,
And blunt the famished beak of buzzard death.
I say this is you, the you you cannot stop.
One of the tiniest of the colorful birds
Lights on her ashen feather and preens
Its throat, and the wind from this tiniest fan
Becomes a gust.  Stop.  Stop.  Stop.
You are caught in a hurricane of palpitations,
And in that madness arising from the larynx,
You hear her treacherous story.  I will 
Tell you of a singer screeching in Hell,
Who thinks she sings in Heaven, because she hears
The lilt of her once  lovely voice,
Whose ghost God saved from her perdition,
Because He could not bear to burn its beauty.
And then from those rafters, drooping 
With red thready webs of crimson velvet, a baritone
Defies her sharp soprano.  That is a lie,
The voice she hears is that of the poet
Who loved her, and who, for that devotion,
Burns forever.  And I, to them, bewildered
By their conflict:  "But did she love him too?
Love must save all."  And he, with a squawk 
Of alarm from his raucous beak.  AUK!  She
Never did, and here, when they pass each other,
Their faces are so altered by indifference,
They do not recognize their former passion.
And yet his song of praise, comprised of lies,
Still sings hot heaven out of this cold hell,
And makes the derelict of profound senescence,
A springtime scent that muddles winter's stench.
And I to them, my heart now racing
With dangerous palpitations.  "But how
Can what is gorgeous be a lie?"
And they, in diabolical duet:
There is no voice in hell, however gorgeous,
Which is not tainted by the pain which launched it,
Which is not torn to shreds, when vultures, crowned
With ugly, knobby wattles, tear at the flesh
Of road-kill, to stoke their noxious needs.
Those words undid me, and I said to them:
"Then I am duped, and done in by your art.
I cannot stop my own collateral din 
From dropping through my verse this musky curtain."

Canto VI
The once in a century storms happen
Once a year now, and after these last floods,
The government recruited the dead for clean-up
Duty, a stupid premise for the latest 
Zombie flick.  Up-river the hog lagoons
Burst like bloated sacks, the sludge roiling downstream,
Along with strangely genetically modified 
Hogs — three-headed, big bellied, tiny legs —
They fatten faster — but nobody knew
About them, until their corpses bobbed ashore, 
Littering the grounds of Symphony Hall, 
And filling the tiers of the Opera House 
With their metaphors for the death of high culture.
It has all become a kingdom of biting flies,
A spoiled wreckage of scatophage gluttony. 
The roof has caved, and the putti once flittering
Round the gilded boxes, are bearded now with hog guts,
And much other disgusting detritus 
Of uncivil greed — i.e., the innards of failed 
Poetry.  And it was here, in another
Return to the epic of sleep, that I met 
My father, barfed up from the grave,
A young man again, clothed cap-à-pie,
In boots and a big yellow slicker.  He 
Was the animatron of my past, 
The script's central figure, that lamia
Of the vulgar imagination, which never
Read a book, but burned a dozen,
That is to say, the collective monster
Of trendy formulæ, the holotype of a species,
The individuals of which are each and all
Gross mutants, as sterile of progeny as mules.
When I looked at him, I thought, 'I do not exist.'
"Son," he said, "I got separated from my
Squad, and I was up in the nose-bleed section
Of the Grand Ole Opry, the marble
And plush carpet floors slimed over,
And my boots slip-slidin' on filmy
Human heads."  I got suspicious at the term
'Filmy', not like him at all, but still
I listened, like some forensic lip-reader,
Following his ruined mouth down the path
Of folly, the path of vitriol spewing like puke
From a man devouring Facebog — Messican
Rapists stealin' our jobs, Lazy-ass
Triggers gettin' rich on quellfare, them fig-eaters
Comin' over here with their sleeper babies,
Und der persecution of gut Khristian Nazis
At XmasZeit — whoever this was, it was not
The father I knew, the father who loved me,
And who loved other people.  It seems as if
Death had worked him over with this racist-schtick,
And made him imprudent with his speech,
Now inundated with the trendy bigotry
That had seized the climate, and whose bloody
Flooding had baptized the once split city,
And made of it a single swamp.  "Son," he
Said, "I was in the very belly of the beast,
The ruined Opry House, where they perform
For the hoity-toity pointy-headed rich
Satanic rituals of murder, incest, and 
Miscegenation  — You understand."  I did.
Those were awesome spectacles I saw 
There, humans in super-human mode.  They touched upon
My deep-seated fantasies and terrors,
The tragedians ennobling with interwoven
Music the interplay of physical and metaphysical
Conflicts, my hoggish affects becoming
Marginally human, as I sat in 
Those nose-bleed seats, and wept real tears — 
More real than those squeezed out at the death of my father.
"Son, listen to me.  Death is so very 
Instructive.  The opera house is a hexagon,
A honeycomb of dreams ... "  What?  "Listen.
I am tellin' you.  The cortex is a honeycomb,
A recurrin' excitation of superficial layers
Clonin' spatiotemporal patterns."  What?
"Immigrants are violatin' the cerebral frontiers."
What?  "There needs to be a wall, a corpus collosum."
Had my father with his 10th grade education
Become some kind of neuro-fundamentalist?
The mercurial quickness of evolution,
Revolving in the cramped space of the coffin ...
That's what I said a couple of years later,
When the dream of death started spinning in my crotch
With a piss ant's logic and a prostate poised
For urgent micturition without effect.
But at the time, I merely puzzled this: 
The flood has not dispersed, this is all still
Over my head.  "Listen," he said, "listen, 
I'll tell you the story.  I was in the upper
Tiers, alone, you understand, and I broke
Into a box, which had been sealed — ah — 
At the height of the flood — for who knows how long —
And there I was face to face with that hog,
That monster with three heads, starved,
Snortin', and crazy, tusks drippin' with saliva.
And he could move, I'll tell you, like elephant 
Seals move, his blubber sack blobbing along
Like a bloated worm, propelled by appetite. 
Listen," he said, "are you listenin'?"  I was.
But the colossal implications of his words
Could never be more than distantly perceived,
Their immensity ill-defined by fuzzy boundaries.
"Listen, there I stood at the verge of my demise,
Immobile as a rock in all my rain gear,
Too constipated by my fear to move, 
And that beast fixin'  to make a meal of me."
"And what did you do?"  I asked him, breathless
To hear.  "I jumped from the box and shinnied
Down the curtain."  "But how did you know
The curtain was that near?"  "Son, liiiisss ... sin ... "  But
Now he seemed far away, his outlines fading,
Leaving only a glistening path of yellow slime,
Retreating like that Angel of the Lord's
From the debacle of his failed rebellion.
Then I heard, or I thought that I heard, the answer
To my question.  "Son, things being what they were —
It was a kind of cosmic poetry —
The curtain was there — because it had to be."

Canto VII
Tseemi gnomi pheelidt bredit
Merdjukudcudit pneu olt f I
Dadgumblambewe koughphaulcrapee
Orsumdinlikdhat gmsuk s Y ...
Which is what he sort of said, Punchy, the mum 
In the blorted mordmer.  To which the other,
Whom some call Paunchy, incensed, reblorted:
Omysturd fusalikt utok gnontsenz 
Istlukr fort wastdando ort fr whorting 
Y dew U raunt rowntdrownt wysting bredundime ... 
"What?  I've been told, when rage has swallowed you, you
Count to one-hundred slowly, but here I am
Upon my second round, and still rage rotates
Through me, like loose knives."  "Walk back the wounds to tears,
The tears to air, and breathe, and breathe again,
Until speech comes, calm as a lake reflecting
The lake of sky.  Find in the midst of these 
Perpetual perturbances a slow mist rising
From more thunderous joy."  "What?  Who said that?"
"The spell binger, don't you know me?  The veracious
Voice in the crowds, the crow in the coal mine's
Canary, crowing before you croak.  That is to sway,
Your bard of paradise, canting your do's and don'ts.
You are inside the bubble of sense, less sense 
Than sorrow, in the sphere of saving too little,
You squander too much.  You've been swallowed
By the alienation cloud, unknown, and unknowing,
Your drool is dribbling down."  "Down where?"  "Why, down
Through the crack in the murmur, where the cranky
Coot punches his comic paunch, and blabbers babble
Against the common ravages of time,
Heart knots and love knots making arterial clogs.  
Be carpful.  Mime your steep.  Listen to me,
And see how comfort comes."  "How could it come?"
"It comes as an away-from, turning aside 
In the siddhe."  "What city is that?"  "Listen.  
I'll tell you the story.  Once, when a bumpkin,
With incomparable aplomb, came from
The country to the capitol, his very 
Small bubble of spherical inside-ness
Was burst, and he cried out to those who were
Strangers, 'There are so many selves!  How will
I know which is mine?'  He feared if he fell
Asleep, when he woke again, he would be
In another, much more decrepit body.
He asked an old man near him what to do.
The old man told him: 'Blow up these balloons,
And tie them to your hand, and when you wake,
The treasure of yourself will be the ballast.'
'Well,' thought the bumpkin, 'that seems quite reasonable,
And of all things known, the wise ones treasure reason,
As misers cherish riches.'  So, comforted, 
The bumpkin fell asleep.  He started dreaming.
He saw what a voice was showing — lucidly. 
The vice showed this: A man in a chair, with wires
Taped to his head, and beyond, a wall with 
A window, scientists watching from a 
Computer room.  The scientists were fighting.
Shouting and shouting, words pummeling one
Another, but he could not understand 
What they were trying to say.  Finally he 
Saw the computers were stuck in a loop,
And the daytorn was slowly spinning round and round
With a question that could not resolve its answer.
What to do?  And where to snooze it?  Here is what he did:
He detached himself from the leads which tracked
His braincaves, and came into the room, where
He saw electrical bands of neon roys,
Every one red, and brilliant, and entangled
In knot after knot of impenetrable
Wrangling.  'This must be a dream,' he thought,
Until Doctor Green, the leader — the unreasonable
Lieder — emerged from the red with a bubble
Between his lips.  Then the bubble burst,
And the bumpkin woke up in the city.
He saw the red balloons tied to the hand
Of a very old man, who was clearly struggling
For breath.  'And what great con is this? that old
Man fooled me, and now he has escaped
With my young body!'  And when he looked out
On the crowds, which were hobbling by,
He saw that the city was having a celebration,
And he among them — this simple blue buffoon — 
Carrying his balloons, amidst swarms of red balloons,
Millions and millions of old ones, acting like children."
And then the vice went silent. The blank air
Smiled, while I, incensed, just managed to blurt out:
"But what does it mean? this story you've belched out,
Like a toad who was never a prints, and never well be!"
"Nothing."  "But why tell a story that is meaningless?"
"I did not say it was meaningless, I said 'Nothing' —
The very first bubble to investigate.  Listen,
Can you not see that what I mean to mean
Is an issue of tracing currents through the circuits
Which always emerge from the story's hollowest words?
This is the chance you take when you fall asleep,
The chance you take when you read and when you listen,
That the Vulture, Fortuna, will be waiting for you,
On the other side of the wall of calculations.
Look up in the sky, you will see her wheeling round.
You will see her reflection shadowing the lake,
Yet never raising a single ripple there."
"You speak in circles and you want to dupe me.
You amuse yourself, but I am not amused."
"You speak like a green girl, who does not know
She is going to be a mother."  And when 
He said that, I could feel my rage, engendering
Something deep inside my belly.  I wanted
To strike him, but there was only air there,
And a Cheshire grin that spoke in aspirations.
"I speak of buzzard wisdom, which feeds on death.
The vessels of the blood are not the blood
Which flows, and the blood which flows
Is only the spirit's vessel ...  Now you 
Can glean from this what words must carry
When they go round and round and round and round,
Like winged worms in the brain, which nurse on nerves,
And when they're touched by the probe of the neurosurgeon,
They burst in the air like bubbles, saying nothing."
'I'm getting old,' I thought, 'and I feel sullen,'
The rage inside me sinking to a ceasepool.
But from that stinking cess, gas bubbles popped,
As from a baby's breath, when burping pap.

Canto VIII
The chief climatologists are always drunk now,
Stirring their highbails with the stiff tongues 
Of stillborn fetuses, because they know,
They know much more than they are telling.
Passed out, head down on the bar, their eyes
Rolled back in their heads, you would think
They are dead, but no, deep down in the brainstem,
They dream that the roots of the city, like the roots
Of old Moloch's teeth, are fixed in the clouds,
Which after the autumn's fires, pour down black rains.
With some autonomous stimulation
Of jaw and tongue — they mumble loquacious
Trivialities, which, dear Reader, dear, dear Ridder, 
We will have occasion to revisit, 
When we transcribe them for our anthology
Of flirty limericks and hairy aphorisms,
A book never to be catalogued 
In any dawn-dewy decimal system,
Now that perpetual night keeps falling and falling,
And the communal knowledge repositories
Are being permanently evacuated.  
The TV over the bar drones on and on,
Continuously regurgitating the speeches
Of the demagogue, the maledictorum
Of his slanders utilizing a vocaddueblarey
Shrunk down to infantile propuketions,
And basically always saying that the rebellious
Readers of books spread syphilis and fleas
Among his cult of illiterate deplorables.
Burn us again, oh Blob, and cause thy base
To shine, and we shall be saved.  Selah.  
What's that?  And the barman, scholar
Of inebriated babbling, will tell you 
That these syllables, found primarily
In the Psalms, are from ancient Hebrew, 
But their etymology has never been 
Definitively determined.  Most probably
They are a notation to the choir master
That here there is a break in the music —
This, the functional equivalent to the hearers
Of the words "stop and listen."  Amen.  But do we?
Oh no, verily, we do not.  A very revoltin' development,
Emetic to the nth degree — the acid reflux,
As has been often refrained, of acid rain.
The voice from the head on the bar says,
"As a dog returneth to his vomit ... Listen,
Did I ever tell you —  tell you — did I ever say
How we now live like depleted uranium frog spawn
At the varied bottom of the sky's thick swamp, 
The bad angels' sewers are backing  up ... up ... up ...
And the whizzers are rizin' to drown 
The citizens' toes — oops — I mean woes.  I 
Cannot muck this any clearer ... " a phrase 
That makes the speaker's head glow red — 
As a long interminable wail of molten lead
Springs up on the desert borderlands of meaning.
Their flames are yearning right in the heart
Of the muddle.  And the barman, with his expert
Exegesis, adds: "The appearance of the trance
Personality, or personogram, is displayed
In the wrinkles of the face, just as are snaky
Ridges in the sand, when the surf recedes,
Or as in the cracked mud of a desiccated stream.
They represent aspects of the entity
Which are too large to fit into the physical
Frame of the body.  Such aspects
Are anti-spatial and atemporal.
They live in the midst of history as exiles, 
And their burping and belching utterances,
As unpoetic as they seem, and indicative
Of some extra-terrestrial sign, 
Are not signifiers in the Saussurean sense
At all — they are — to paraphrase McLuhan —
Both message and medium."  And from 
The end of the bar — the other side — the barmaid jokes:
"Is that supposed to be a pun, hun'?"  To which 
The barman, peeved, then counter-quotes:
"The contrast between two points of view — 
Synchronic and diachronic — is absolute,
And admits to no compromise."  To which
The demagogue ejaculates: "They're coming
From all these shithole cuntries to hit your babies 
In the head with hammers.  Drugs. Thugs and rapists.
I have the very best instincts for raking for-rest ashes."
To which the persongram, the head on
The bar, replies: "These mac-chronic 
Macerations are continually increasing 
The velocity of voricity.  The mesosphere
Is a mess, the walls are breaking down, 
And the thighs of the jet streaker are naked
Of shame.  What remains is only uncivil
Humiliation — and squealing rats."  To which the barmaid, 
Sneering, wiping the counter, collaterally 
Quips: "The apparatus of the corporate
State is no longer the umpire of a simple
Use economy — the trading of wish for foul.
It is the mass psychosis of faciality
In lieu of fact."  She looks at the bloated
Face on the bar, then at the one on the screen, and says,
To no one in particular — yet the whole joint hears her —
"This is the sine qua non of the murder scene,
Only the corpse is hidden."  Then she lifts
Up the head on the bar by a fistful of hair,
And lets it drop back with a BONK!, and everyone
Cringes.  To which the head retorts:
"The innocuous neutrality of the corpse
Is like a virtuous made in a gilded whorrorhouse.
She awaits with anxious ploy the syphilitic bridegroom.
The case file contains disturbing material,
Woodcuts of virgins broken on Fortune's wheel,
While pudgy putti in the heavens snigger,
Their pre-Durer-shunal bluntness crudely carved."
To which the barmaid snurts: "The usual
Marital disappointments."  And then the head:
"I remain, as you pee me, unpro-pissshehated,
And incapitulated by un-con-troll-cable e-vents.
Babies are falling out of the cindery clods — 
Our futures falling and bawling on the turf — 
They litter the lawns of upscale Absurdia,
Like worthless stuck certifican'ts.  Enough."
The face on the TV screen goes wicky-wonky.
There is a reversed blipping sound, as of 
A sick Theremin machine swallowing its own
Rising gorge.  Then the screen goes dark —
Dark, dark, dark, dark —  
And the patrons of the bar all start to moan,
As unused to blankness as they are to sobriety.
The head of the voice on the bar, now satyrmizes:
"As you can see.  I am quite unfit to drive.
I have killed ambition with strong Think,
And am stilly stewed in the stink of turpitude.
I am become irrelephant in the rum.  
My migrateary goose is cooked.
I must be getting back — I can't go on.
The blank wail cryses everywake I look.
This weighs upon my con-shunts heavily."
There is a pause, a kind of pause, a halting pause,
And then the head remembers, stops its talk, 
Then blankly, lunely, guiltily, blinks and looks,
The skull an inch, two inches above the bar,
Lifting its own imponderable weight,
Almost enough to cast a dark reflection.
It is incredible how much it trembles,
Incrudable that IT has the strength to speak,
Yet speak IT dust, desperate to X its debt:
"Would somefun please reburn my lie'bury hooks?"

Canto IX
Going ... going ... insignificantly ... gone ...
Gone to where the sleep that is not sleep beckons.
Not all of us, but some of us, some of the time,
Do discover — note the tense verb — 
That all realities are only the interlucking
Of various subjective states of a-War-ness,
And that by means of three spatial dementias
And spree trumporal ones, hypnoticians
Have found the way in and through
To the highs and lows surrounding the ego's
Muddled-puddle.  The archeologists of this
Geometrical bury-center have managed 
To move through these knowcales
By means of penetration.  They say: "Focus on
The lines.  They are tangled and glowing.
These are the circuits around whose nodal
Junctions there are puns, impasses of nonsense
That await the picking of the gnos for one who has
The knack for tspringing sknots, and tslipping
Through the plea-hole."  And that is how the Mall
Catastrophe was excovered and explored,
Sounds of symbols, tabret tongue-drums,
Alms of aums poured into the cyclical ear
To beat out voyaging rhythms, where the I-am comes,
Comes and goes, passing in and through — 
And ... and the place of descraption is found.
IT has the voice of virtual mysstory: IT hacks
A meaning.  Watch: a Stygian Rope Trick, where
The Rube goes augering down the spine
Whose chord must hollowly extend
Its elevator shaft down through the first
Layzers of muse-sick whaters.  What?  Yes, you are getting
Sloppy, your eyelids weighted with read, the countdown allruddy stuttered:
Tot-tap-tit-Ten, no-na-none-nine, eh-hit-hate-eight, sa-sow-sigh-seven, sad-sore-sin-sex ...  
Quaking shifts in the subsurface above the bathysphere's
Enormous doom have bloated a bubble
In Earth, which has filled with sewage ...
Frick-fracking in that underoiled's not-shalling
Out of the very rocks, till they shook in a shriek.
But whether a Klanner or an Arid Sleek, the custom gives no clue.
Yet you do remainder his farce: the encephalitic head,
The fringe of monk hairs, the googling eyes — 
Doctor EL ROI with all his virtriold soloshuns.
Of course, it was this geezer's geysers eructing 
In Suburpia that alerted us to the presence
Of this ancient burial bound — methane gas attacks
On the living by the dead — you understand.
The flerty farty figures of hystory Foxing the wares with intoxican'ts —
We breathed this toxic gas as if it were knowfun's.
The rope is of glass, and the surly guide, he whose only
Contact up to now has been with the spirits
Of the lust bled shoppers, he, who offers no explanation
For the pair of I-flames which flicker
At the end of their droop, except to point,
And say: "There.  Between.  There is the in-trance."
The blue flames collapse into twone.
IT is seen.  But is IT pierced?  
I could hardly contain my fear, my pulse racing
Maniacally through all kinds of 6 dimensional
Determinants, not knowing how I could breathe
If I stepped out of the vapor-lock and into this sticky
Swamp of wasted remembrance.  I stepped out.
But I was submerged, and so, against my will,
Out pops these gills — they make a sucking sound,
The bellows of their glabrous subsurfaces,
Laboring like a man dying for want of breath.  I panic.
I send up my red balloons.  My tongues afloat, aloft ...
There is a tearing sound as of a merciless gale
Ripping a sail, the mast breaks through the hull,
And I break in, through, and down ... I enter the tragic sMall.
And what I see frozen there, now freezes me.
An intercom, still operational after
All these sealed centuries, says: Welcome
To Distribution Heaven, where every item
Of manufractured desire is displayed
For your mewing pleasure.  The moneyed
May move about freely, the non-moon-eyed,
Must stay inside the observation tubes,
So that the shoppers may see how 
The nother half sieves.  Impossible
To calculate the misusury of the hurled,
Children without murthers, aninulls without habitits,
Min who fight and die for No-thing ... At the mere thought,
My head leaks tears.  Forensics had already
Placed lights about the place, the Mall's
Own lights having been made inoperational 
At the time of the catastrophe: Outside
Ingress and egress shut by the quake,
The generators destroyed, and the millions
Inside this buried-outside were plunged
Into impenetrable inside darkness.  Due you understand?
Generators, genetics, frenetics — Get it?  Yes.
Shoppers.  Free shippers.  The voice is hype knotic.
You are getting sheepy.  Order now.
It smacks you right between the high-brows.  Yes.
Yes, you, with your unopenable eyes,
You, who hear to see, and fear to say, you,
Who flutter like a badt echo through the piled goods,
Flying out of your skin in astral flitters, you,
Who savor with a poet's tongue, the run-on-runs,
Where the extinct condors sip, eyeing
You, the Reader Read.  Sup sipped up.  Here: The fire sprinklers
Rained.  Here: The terrorist horns howled.  Here: The poor
Broke out of the observation tubes,
And the lightless stores were looted.
Everyone wore new pairs of mismatched shoes,
Dark travelers running aground in Nowhere,
The left foot not kowtowing to what the right is fooling.
Impossible to imagine the mayhem.
In the dark, people put on layers
Of elegant clothing: tuxedos, wedding gowns,
Glass slippers, vampire capes, air shirts 
With polyester hair, bright Spandex thongs,
Pasties for male titties with spangles on 'aum,
Bras in all seizes from A to zed,
Miters, minks, and feathered hats.  They raided
The food courts, and after that, resorted
To cannibalism.  They breathed all the oxygen,
And died like unevolved fish, legless floppers flipping
In and between great pools and noisome slicks 
Of their own corporeal fluxes.  They were wrecked,
Their banded vessels broken and unwound,
Their circuitous circuits suffering severance.
But their decay was arrested by the sealed
Atmosphere, and salted to unendurality
By the panicked and angry tears of their last
Violent rages.  The dead lie everywhere,
And the skiving lie like the dead, in mutual mendacity,
And everywhere they lie in perfect states
Of unmourned preservation, some
Partially eaten lying inside those who 
Died eating them.  And now as I look around,
I can see several teams of mausoleumists 
Working with their resins to preserve the entire catastrophe,
Plans for a museum-slash-amusement park,
Already in the works to pay for the expedition's 
Excavations.  But this is all very hush-hush — for now.
Authorities fear that should the catastrophe
Become comicsensical knowledge,
The rich might think that shopping was too 
Dangerous, the poor too intimate, the avalanche
Of time too sudden, and too heavy to withstand,
Even if done virtually, and with nothing to fear
But the nightmire of what's inside them.
None of this, of course, has anything to do
With me.  If all the jewels of the entire mountain
Of time and space, history and flesh, were to be heaped
On me it would be but a wart to Everest.  I only
Want that one feathered, one-feather hat,
The one that the prima donna wore in my nightmerde,
Where her voice still sang without a body,
And where that beautiful song was the poetry
Of the one who loved her truly  ... and ... futilely.
I only want to know, in my downward spiral,
That the old pine on the mountain is growing
Still — slowly, and through an everlasting cold,
But growing, and sending the tough roots 
Down and down through the cracked skull of the granite dome,
Growing, and stretching its one green twisted finger
To inch through the frost and retch for the feared, black moon,
Growing ... groaning ... then irretrievably swallowed
By a dawning downing yawn.

Canto X
What nowbody knose can't smirk you.  Really?  Yes.
Yet any bureaucritical committee sent
To study the Necrophilia Advocacy Grope
Will have to traverse the muckworks christcrossed
Atop the angstsoup.  This is that meal which the intestines
Of those killed — in one of those incessant raids
Into No-Mum's land — have squirted out
Betwixt the trenches of the combitants. 
These are the dead who believe that they have
No vice, and so their cries come as a surprise
To them, and you hear it in their various
Ticks of speech, thoughts and talk, like raillines 
That no longer run parallel in the same direction,
But split and twist and take off on their own
Curlicue paths of politifool argumouth,
Using words like grope instead of group, they sway,
"Because the government has no right
To have a monopoly on violence,
Any more than it deserves to have a monotony
On printing money."  Now this might make you
Think that all these fibertarians would be
Billionaires who live in gold blast grouses,
And they are — they run things in those moments
Where the funning of them is the illusion
Of the moment — but most of the time we meet
Them down here, in the trenches, 
Each in their sumptuous bunker fitted out
With the most garish ostentatiousness,
Every bidet and commode plaited with foul's gold,
And each a general too, decked out 
In their own self-styled unifrump —
(Watch out for those reverseseals of litters,
They mite to tune out to meme Sommething — )
But I digrouse.  They don
Rushin' parade-grunt hats with high crowns embossed
With the loiters E. R.  They sport Amerigon epaulets
The size of empty dinner plates and all a-dangle
With Snot dingles.  They show a leg
In Brutish jodhpurs, whipped
Into wing-shape by raiding crops,  
And they cloak themsolds in the red
Of quilted Mandarin smogging gowns 
Made out of living sickworns, which camouflage,
With black snaky stitchings on a blackground,
The siphers of midgic milateary budgets.
Of course everything with them is a masculine
Inter-not-so-nice-ine dispute,
No women allowed, except for whores, 
Oh — and cooks, and, yes, nurses, so this is what you get:
Surprise! The war of one moment fighting the next,
And the pleasure that was supposed to be
There, already always in the past, hardened
Into the anthracite coproliths which,
'Though shiny black in this glinting, stinking
Darkness, nevertheless glow read from within,
Making the skin of the disputaunts burn
Like that of frostbyte victims, their opposites
Ever-combusted by means of pairadoxies — so?
So smear we aren't: back to those whores again,
Which sMother, sAinted, and living without genitals — 
The very treasure of the Krankenspouse — 'though long deceased —
Keeps tending like tamed soiled doves.
The figures here are carved like bra-reliefs
Into their background of faces which can only
Look at themselves in the screams of computours
Or I-phunnies — all become selflayed putraits in the house of ill-fame.
One of the inhabidunce hears the thick of your speech,
And from that accent recognizes you
As one of the native brood of his homelounge,
And in his arrogance, he deigns to speak:
"If the patrianarchy is to survive, we must 
Have a fully autonomous reprodicktive sycle,
And confine our suxuall forays only to those
Women unable to bear children because they
Are dead.  If we fail in that, then our fantasy 
Of furthering sums without nomen would 
Have to be abandoned, and saberspace
Would be depeopled.  We demand the rights
That we looted for our concocktion: To screw 
Everybody by means of a fetishistic 
Abuse of technullogy.  We demand
Our reprodictive freedom without 
Generative obligations.  We demand
Omnipotence with Viagrail inputs.
We demand post-human informatic bodies
Immune to all evoluptuary biologics, and we,
Yes, we — by we I mean me, ME, I demand
To be free to design your functioning
With my liberal ingestion of taxcuds and pharmasewerculls."
Now, in a moment — the next, always the next —
You will be called upon to refute this tieraid,
And separate your-self from your sknot-sylph.
But for now you are merely duumbed to read, to glisten.
Incrudibly, even down here, N.A.G.'s
Regurgitate what they hate, vilely complaining
That immegrits from the unterloaned
Are feeling our nobs, and even with
All their dolors and scents, they can't 
Buy a decent merdteenie — it's just the shits,
So they have to contend themselves 
With whatever golden showers
Fall from the cleft above them.  In short,
They are always douched with fear.  
Yet, in long, the NAGs are inconstantly holding virtual 
Brail-lies wherein their deplorable concriminals
Clamor for that Space Force which will 
Protect them from all alien dieities.
They would knot, know, not knaver upgrade themselves 
With mexigenashun, no, no, not these crudes
Of body odors held in thrall by an
Infantile vocabyouleery of New-Reek.  And? ...
And ... after one of these outburps, now ...
Now! ... It will be your turn to squeak.  
What a tarrably grave respungability.  
Do you think you are up to IT?  Perhopes.  Your tongue
Is mythological and yet it has a kind of Chin-ese
Underdroop that drools when it wakes from sleep,
As though it were dragon on and on 
In perpetual boardoom — another
Of that scalar species of fearytoll drugon
Coiled into the dump of its hordes. 
And when it reads from the tele-tromper,
It can only engage in barroom demogoguryslop.
Such as?  Such as: "The crumbling, predatory system
Of empiric imjurialism is run by an elitossed
Sub-species of evull psychopoops who are
Devoid of any doomman heart.  True, they do prefer
The smarminess of soft squeal methods, climate
Change, mass starvation, disease, and the like,
But they can go hard when properly,
Chemically stimulated.  You smell that stench
From the valley above your head!?  That
Comes from the decomposing bodies
Of their victims, millions and millions of them,
Who for century after censurey keep their corrosive
Suprasystem submerged in open sewer secrets,
So many silly sybilants, searching for solace, 
Their smud bearing down on the trenches
With the vindictiveness of an inevitable crush.
Pretty, sneaky, what?  Preddy G.D. snaky."  
But of course, you don't say any of that.
How could you?  You are only a reader, a listlessner,
And as such, unquestshunably only another souse 
Of contagion.  Remumlber, this may be Hell, but there
Is a Whirled waiting for you incite 
In a veritable riot of silence, and there
You may finally excise the features of your face,
And see the original that defies its symbull,
And there, there, you can be 
That being apart — that bleating hard —
Who is finally Xcerpted as the provocatwerp
Of nobody knows just what.

Canto XI
An incompletion going round again ...
An incompletion going round again ...
I have found that I can't always be in the tame —
Wildness seeps in.  Do you smell it?
Fumes of fear and ambitchen, the burnt
Sillia of the intestines stinking like hair afire,
And driving you from your gelden safedoom.  Stop: 
You know the drill.  Count to ten slowly, then ...  
Count to ten slowly again-begin.  The fatigue will be 
Unborable, deliberation and debilitation 
Arriving like identical Sameese twins
To feed you the usual claptrap, a woman,
As you might have already guessed,
Trying to nurse you on her mashed pap 
Of coyote hide and rat tales, so that 
You begin to think: 'I should stop this.
But how?'  Stop.  Stop playing possum, lying 
In your butt cave, and hoping that the dark,
And the skunk stench of your regurgeiterations'
Will be a sufficient deterrunt 
To those authorities who think that the only
Good poet is a read one, as if they
Could tell one way or another without
Ears to nudge or eyes to fudge.  This fire 
Is getting I-see, and the philosopher stoned
Needs to arrive P.D.Q. or else I will fallow
This fall down the gravity gradient, picking
Up speed now as the hole to a deeper Hell
Clips off my four-footed attachment
To Earth, and my two-legged lollygagging
Round the Word's verge ... my falling fallen, 
Having at last taken that first and final step
Off the ledge of my rocker.  It's a pun,
Don't you see, Peterbolt: 'Upon this rooker
I will bilk my lurch.'  Butt, blings that I wish
Glowed glower are becoming a blur.  Earth
Motor, I am running out of gas, my intestines
Noxiously defibrillating, and my telo-mares 
No longer knitting the unraveled sleeve of care,
So that if I complain about polytricks, 
I shall be limed with an incurable disease —
Don't you see, when the geogropey is misting,
The transitions seem like transgressions,
And nobuddy will believe you if you say
That this is that Western Ponzi scheme of debt for all
But the debt makers.  So sad, so, sow sad,
That of all lines it is their lies only that are immortal,
And there deaths solely which are suspended
In a life of fiduciary incomphrehensighbility,
Of no reel usurer to anybooby.  Stop.  Stop.  Drearly beloathèd:
Let us prey.  "Oh Fooder, who farts in heaveland,
Grant that we may find the off-switch for learning,
And return our emojis to that state
Where prickery alone con do our badding 
Without compission's yellow e-motion."
What's the murder, you're not purveying?
Pollcat gut your tongue?  You say that 
Parmidadon't was brought to the undercoiled
After the usual inquasitortural procedures,
He, having lost the use of his blends,
And having to be held up, left and right
Sales on either side.  You say he said:
Drear, Infirmmammeries, I am in fermed,
Possibly infarced.  More than anycling,
I need to get to a Hospeddle, but instead,
You are making me the head dote of this perraid,
Claiming that I am a Protestaunt!,  Imagine, me!  ME!  guilty —
Of all things — of orthalocks hearassay.   Oh,
You whomen, drugging me to the stake for my 
Very own auto-dah-fry, and me stinkin'
The hole time that you were the doubters
Of the Sum."  It was said by the consaderable
Crude that was garnered there to see
The sexacution that these shes did not seem so weird
When the poop's mitre that they put on their
Heeds for a yoke, burst into fame.  They two
Made fun — and that single bunfire singed
Her coif to her skull, her white doom crooking,
And sprouting a single feather through the crack.  
It was sad, sad, that instead of dennuding her din,
She sung like a fickle bard, when the blue flames
Cleaved her dead.  It was read that she
Hit all the high notes before she fell, said, they say, 
By that tattletold bumpkin who had come
To the klepitol specifically to see the lexecution,
And who, in the act of telling, coughed out
Both of his lungs, suspending them on the liar
Of his tongue so that his joke hung in the air
Above us, a brace of prepared ballooms,
Twone trueboredorian X-cess recuffing history,
Their birth-red black from smogging — period — fool stoop.
Which like all approved sprech in this stingdom
Of putrid goldant trumpery, yearned to pop
The quip of their lust probability, and turn
Their black hole to red riot.  Y?  Y, so that
Poetry would not die in the lacklight
Of sullance, but be rebourne in the listenspore,
In a firest and blast rack of piromaniacsee,
The eloquence of the uneducoddled,
Rising above all homefooling to speak
Of the unbalanced scales of juicedunce,
Two jiggers full — can't say the M-word unless
You two are N's — two become one,
Twome jiant jug of eye-risky, with a chaser
Of gall, shaken to babbles, and stirred to foam.  Y?
Y so that denial will bloom in a Crude Who-whore-hallus-gin-again: Her again,
She whose round hat with its one spar-owed feather,
Singing like a nightengull in the wrackedcoon light,
Those red bandido eyes staring at the intruder,
Unabashed from atop their great filchings of garbage.
Night has come.  Sad, so sad.  The landfouled is quite quiet,
And yet the midden mound leaks squeaks from underneath.
This is the Now wherein all animals have been spooken —
The nude Atom having named names —
The nocturnal minamals, who every nick
Prowl the parimeters reminding you that
You durst not subtrick entities unnecesseerily,
Which is what the ethics profossil told you.  Why?
Because you are lost again in the Big Thicket,
Where all exstinkshorns have gone  
To await, as mere blank gobaloins, the fate
Of Dunce Scrotus and the rest of his medieval
Scholdelastics, who have not counted,
Who have failed to count, who have stuttered
To count, but who got all tangled in all
The complexirony before they could arrive
At the number of angliliths that could be seem
Lustling on the head of a spin ... 
Their incompletion going round again ...
Their incontemption droning down this fen ...

Canto XII
People pustules ask me — you task me: "What is it like,
Taking the lost-fiercst STOP, and leaving the dripping
Lip of the rooky ledge, committing one's tongue
To the remorseless gravity gradient of the cyclonic
Currents?  I imockgine a cartoon caricature,
Feet christ-crossing in your desparate luuuung failllllll,
Hoping somewho to find that little grit
Of footing even a fly needs to grip the downward
Wall."  "No, that's not what it's like at all.  Let 
Me tell you a story, a gory straight from the camps
Of the Internotionalization Proisoner Sobblightaspree ...
"Sob what?"  "Can't you see this mirror is constantly
Murmured in the hidden word?  And that that turd
Is hidden in refugee society?"  "What?" 
Good.  You've had to stop.  Now ... are you listening?  
Listen: Once upon a line — a very sticking time —
A stubborn little critter left his larval foam — 
And not a movement too soon — because a huge Iraqnid 
Was heeding his way — and though still unfledged, 
Our little squitter, not yet angeliflied with flings, 
Outsprings from the contentious grossamore 
And begins to snaregull through the not quite empty layer.
But at each reached level, the air was statusfied,
And as our worm travelled graveward,
He broke in by breaking through sever-all
Tessellated webs of spiterthreads,
Making the predaTory pattern unreadably cocoonative.
Howsomeffort, little bits of sticky
Still stuck to him, and when enmummified
With enough of these ethereal  banned-ages,
He became tacky enough to stick."  "Stick where?
There is no where here."  "Don't interrupture!"
He became, I tell you, tacky enough to lick,
The proverbial fly on the wail, the soothing 
Pee-green wall — of an I-See ward.  He looked
Everywar with his indie-pendant compooled
Eyes, and he saw a body on a host-puddle bed,
Penetrated by an entangling network of rubes
And liars.  He heard many blipping sounds
As of a sick There-a-Moan Machine reversing
Its whining in iambic swallowings of acid
Reflex, every other second an inarticulate
Bleeping eaten by silence ... "  "Stop.  
Your story is just too cleaver by half,
And this circuitousness is ... "  "Don't interrip!
The story will tell you in good time why this 
Dialysis is necessary to cleanse the flesh-eating
Inflection in your pus ..." "And?" ... "and funnily drain the swamp.
The body in the bet is on life-support.  I shouldn't
Have to toll you that, even our little larvy-try-on-the-wall,
Can multi-seize that ... and the graving family
Are gathered round the bed, wearing glean masks
To protect against dielution, all fearing that
The half noman and half vampire machine —
A.K.A., their blassèd Earth Motortaur, is about to give birth
To that tiny skeleton so long horded in her 
Long post-past-men-o-pausal womb.  It is
A dramatic last chance moment, which even
Some theoillogic insuct brain, like hours, can feel, if not sthink,
So that our little pretentionist, his tiny voice
Unheard by the doomans in the croon, whispells:
'I pry that my Lord, the Sting, will restore
Me to my in-her-a-tense, and that whoover
This is, trying to reincarnate, that their head
Will not be too ensyphylphallic to squeeze
Through the dimenished portal from which the drip
Drops."  "Stop.  No!  Out dim clot.  Enough of this goad-trip,
Your steery-tolling is exhausting ... "  "Pearlapse.  
But your listlessning deflies coughin' hoarse-sense.
Flick the ears, blink the eye-slashes, swish the stale,
And that will deter these biting lies.  Listen,
Tick is timing, and the hobo in your blood
May just well be another sewage-side bummer, he, 
With the Nicked-name of The Fore Hostmen
Of the Apokalllithp, he, the tearable Ghost 
Of Frightgeist Pest, coming to take you 
To the final pestival, where all the lungs
You have lugged through the ribbed caged years
Will sly out of your mooch
Like so many helium read bell-loons ...
Lonely, lorn, oooyoulating
Out on the lack past midnit, crooning
To the flaked, flacked moon.  Mist, yes, this is the wildernest
Calling, that clonely loon cry, a bird-memebrain's
Longing call of faith, and if you were
Bitter at hearing than you are, better at seeing
Than you don't, you would rise from your
Mode of blunt, and fustily realize that the chaos
And corrosieve atmostfear of this room
Are by no matter of means lessened by
The approach of these other Arcing-typs.
See hear now how the points of fire fall like flierwicks
Exploding from that hyperfreer realm
Towards wish our synching mother on the bed aspires,
Winklings, let as recall them,  which
Might actually usher in the clarion collapse 
Of the mold cultural cannon.  Boon!  Can't you see,
Bug, that your Motor is dying, and that your
Emersion from the oviposition slight
Can only assume any shape?  Once, twice, 
When you're convinced that each one of the molecruelles
Of the fluid are themselves the force
By which the multi-level is produced,
You swill perceive at thrice that the sheerisked
And simblest way of realizing that loveall
Is not to interfear with IT."  "Stop.  Stop."
"Stop, I cannot."  "Why?"  "Because, Mr. Fly,
This is you.  Because, Mr. Prick-me-dainty, always
So concerned about your closehoarse, this is through.
Becursed, Misster Voyeur, wanting to watch like the flay-on-the-wall,
And speak in waspers to your own laurghal brainstump,
This is true.  So stop telling me to stop.
It is not for you to troll me
To stop spreading my new, west wings.
It is not for knot-yews to tree me to stoop
De-delimitating the Minitear's flabyrêve.
My eyes are comprised compounds, and I can fathom
The black storm of itches that are biting
You to follow — that are bidding you —
Worm that you were — squirm that you
Always do — to nerver, never knot link up
To these multi-monstrous swarms
On their riotous weird to knowwar.

Canto XIII
At the bottom of the boomb craters of Foe-Man's bland,
The worm turns, saying what good ashes always say
After the craze: "Good God, it's cold.  Why don't we put another blog on the fear."
And so the pukers that be did, and so it's harpooning again,
The deep scare, full of expiring wails,
Just as the drunken climatoligists said it has bled,
Knowing, as they pretense to do, the answer to the questshown:
What is this Old Weird Whorld glooming to?
The sizzle is sold in lieu of the noman staked.  
So, of cuss, the temptsurapture is just soring.  Sad.  So sad.
But even intelligaunt design must make its cullculations,
So that you will have the proper voting I Don't itty
When the time counts for you to have your election made for you.
Good.  Good.  Perlapse you are bedawning to understand.
And now, now that all your vital information has been
Formalized on the form, for security purposes,
You will be tasked to surrender your fullition,
So that dismembrance can replace experience,
As, for instance, when your fading memory of those old beat-bopped
Rock tuns of the post war sneera, furlows those songs without
Endings, they, the unsatisfying complyshould of the medieval dreamdrum —
Pounded to a prideful pulp-thee-well — 
Of the percatchyouill motown machine, 
In which you could imagine your inknockgenuity 
Travelling onward after its spin in the frackled slylence.
Like a plant afire in artificial blight: The parade
Of the decrepit now begums a vacuous plenum
That the grandchildren cannot bear.  How did we
Get here, in this fade-out, which starts at the very
Bebegging, the old imagining themselves dung again,
Marching behind the fire engine in their 
Easterparadehollowbetween custumes, all of them
Draped in saffron shrouds, in order to injest Tela-Vactive
Rushzooms — yes, yes, in order to sing: "A slum bean, a sonbleed,
Jeerus has made lust hiss scumbeing ... "  a childouch Hymn,
To be sure, but one that should be sung on every mendacious 
Misanthroat's last bereftday.  Why?  Because the Limb of Goat  
Has made us so that we might mix cavile
With the appearance of innocence, and thereby
Note that it is best to turn the mask of subdepravity
Into subdural innoculations against rank heirassy,
Otherwise you, me, we would be duumbed to returd to Misst
Morrow's fourth grade crass to diagrim prism sentences.
Not a task to be snoozed at, you Triviummites, seeing how all 
The graphitied desks are screwed to the floor
In a hierarchrival grid so that they all farce
The blockboard, where the blue haired one
Makes her chalk armimmatures, all the wile foaming
At the mouth with Milk of MAGAnesia,
On account of the fact that the little shuts
In her clasp cause her to upchuck acid 
As inexhaustibly as her desire desires to outlast
Her misery and receive her retryamend pinchon.
The desks will still have a hole in the upper righteous-hand corner,
For the absent ink rebuttle, from which abyss from time to tearm,
Demons arose, whose bodies were made of the ABC gum
That has been clandestinely chawed and stuck
To the underside of the dusk for future mastication.
But we diggross.  The point that we want to make here
Is one in which the culpability for your death
Is flintily assigned to ... Wait.  Stop.  Who? you ask.  Well,
There is something lick a combombation
Of chance ocurseagains which has determined
The order in which the organized violence
Of mass forgetting can subtract your subjectivatweet — and that,
That is the list and foist stoop.  The court could hardly let
The spittle sole that you were be anything but subjected to
The read balloons of asthmatic Nohbreath, the theater
Of the Absurd orientellizing your vile rule virtual spawn.
This is not a yoke, it's a joke.  And, Oxbeau that you are,
You will get IT as swoon as the thirteenth crow flays
In his straight lean to the thirteenth row,
Where you will be finally sat in your saidness, sadly.  Ah!
The thirteenth row, the jumbled argumound
Where you will be waiting for the teacher's taloned
Fingers to carefully tear off your little larval thinks — Surprise!
The Goddissed is retorning after her E-peaceeotomy,
The Old Myth Miss, roiled back to her virgin power
As a virtual theomorph who has a mad on against all 
Those musculoaned mugwimps who have denounced
The Huwoeman Party to make their primed-mates stand
In their bumbed-lout bumkers, as the teenie chubbies they were,
Their hairless sloping forehoods swollen with purple smugt.
Now, hear her cries, See-Born:  Champ off their heads!
And so she easy does it, sinking their jars in menstrial blood.
Ah, all nit-night they moan, seeking a soft cure-ill for their male mebranes,
And so the Term has turned: and so, tock-tick, 
This trick is IT:  Athena reborn as HackIT
From the hellsmut of Grate Droopathor —
A worse headache he is unlikely to ever have agone.  So?
So what exactly, if anything, were you expectorating?
The Voice Principle's vice from the P.A. box
Has allbloody told you that Camelot has been shot,
And your dream of youth and justice will be squished to royjuice
In the junkles of Fleeit Numb, and yet you still pledge
The allegiance for which it stoops, one Gnashin' under Gob,
Biting the heads off strangers.  Sad, sad that the little child
Never saw IT coming.  Sad, sad: Again the stars and bars striped with gore
Marshing home from a smother swore, 
A nother weary smarmy of swampy sewercides,
The stigmuted blood still clogging the pulses' of all our Notional enterprises,
That spam ole issue of wrycyst slobbery, drooled over, but never diejusted,
The Civil Boor being fought again by the vary curst reborables.  And yet ... 
Nothing will come of this nor go from thus,
Nothing but more predactions, a look behind the 
Nothing mask of the child you once weren't, and seeing
Nothing more than this topical bowl of worms, which
Nothing Must Morrow arranged on the skeletal
Note-tings of her diagroans could in the least wise leave
Nothing to the imaginocean, repetition showing that 
Nothing soaksseeds like nextguess.  But, you say,
Noting your not-likely not guiltiness, as if
Nothing you could say could effer revive the tree where
Nothing was left to chance, and like all the words now
Knotting themselves on their wormtrestle, you say,
Nothing.  Why is that?  Are you surrendering?
Did you predestine even as a child that it would
Be better for you to wear Fortuna's vulture mask
In the Perrate, and not trust to Blob's special grace,
But align your safe to the wheel of ordinary justdunce,
Meeting out punishments to your owned nonsoulf
According to the Negative Anima's owllit
Prolancements:  Don't fret.  Night Mother will let you know,
Even as she calls you from sleep for your homescalping
Lesssum, that your poetricks are not worth 
A listlessbucket of warm spit, so that even Death,
Forever pendant on one of the diagrims,
Hangs there like the promise of a scat-goat,
A Saturnday morring slash for the briar snatch,
Mum's long hours of drudgery still dogging you like dust,
Dust with dustmites the size of Musttiffs,
Breaking their chains with lungery aggressions
To delve your nuts with their sharp Caintime teeth.
It's a dog's strife — that's for sure — what you didn't know back when.
But what could you ever Judas about it in the nick?
You weird only a child at the time of your
Suspension, only another thorn on the rose's
Bloomdead stem, a worry wart on Everest, where the cairnskree
Atmustfear has preserved the bowelwastes
And bodies of former failed expedition
Forbears, their desiccated expressions
No help to you now that Massed Morrow
Is hydrophobiaing you with all her goledangly grimmitacold
Moodifires, all her participolls dungling there
Like a hanged caught-got-your-tongue,
Your ring-awound-the-rosey, duncing
With the good student's bucolic plague,
A good part of the poorrelation
Of Yourhopes woven into nooses
To choke the stuck stick figure.  Cant.  You smell IT?
It spells like the good lie of the suburban
Pastyourgolfed, the ganggreened skin itch
That denihates the imagination 
And makes the poet's tongue bleed blunt,
And the imPotus's skim sweat ICE.  So?  So
The cold, cold ashes get just what they had swished for:
A green log sizzling saps — being swept ablaze.

Canto XIV
At this point in your sounding, you just harpoon
To discover alternayity.  Flings are not as the I
Would wish them.  Know, they are knot.
Another missssage is hidden under this one.
Somewere'nt between the Alphont and OMaga
The idon'tity is cleaverly maligned.
The damned have blames, which is why they are dimmed.
"Really?"  No, not really in the stench you mean,
Whoover you stink you hopened to have been,
A backword poorson, a kind of kingly ordure,
Trekking the margins of an innert desert,
Yokelling through your life, half amputation,
The holy descraption of a fiery scape
Encomparsed by mini blooddreams, the dangling
Hangedmoan on the wormy wrestle plagued out
Entirely as interruptions.  Listen.
There is a channel of I's in every here
Clustered with sillia, jingling teeny phones, a
Bitter bayby whaling in near distance,
Numbly deserted by its Motherloaned —
Your flash, agroaned, on a polllooted shore.
Don't you know now, Leviathan, depleted
Of lair by the wait of gravity, that 
Odd has made you, and is mitey proud
Of Hist accompostment.  Don't you new
Now that the old wail ululating
In its next extinction is only a begoning? 
Get with the pogrom.  Extermination
Is routine.  It is not particular with you.
But dimnation clearly is, and the Dark is how
You feel IT.  "Really?"  Yes, Rilely.  And don't 
Think — now that you are surfering — that BOdd
Is going to save you, arriving, yelling,
In cyclonic silence, Lord of Re-membering.  Y
Be so splurgious?  Incarnation must 
Begin with "re."  Get it?   Once, you go off the beam,
Lore, in another once, again you're on. 
It all happens simultoneously.   One
Is manied.  The flimflam rolled in the cam is
Re-scene only on the scream.  "Reely?"  Yes,
IT rolls out as a continuous scam, no
Mindus without a pulse.  "Bejesus, you must now
Bejoking."  I Am.  Go back to the bee-in 
No-Thing, when it starts to buzz, Creation flies.
Initial contriptions are "re" turning in
Their first spin.  Anyfling can happin if 
Neverynone belives.  Listen.  I'll tale you  
No lies.  Now you see IT, and no you don't.
Now you leer IT, then crow you won't.  But scent  
Keeps Time timed, lest we forget to effect
Death's timelessness.  Ex-squirmination  
Tails are never forever.  The worm will term.
Yes, even when you think you can't, even 
When Odd deserts you.  Promesses ever
Are nulled at this scale of nextistense.
Events dievert.  Yet, let me go off with my story.
Hive-on can wait.  Bunch upon a crime, there was
A virgin modem, whom spirit poked, her nut
Jestating for teighty-ton tears before being normed.
He popped right out of her little I-socket,
A teeny-tiny skeletal Umonkyouless,
Who, when just an instant old — moracle
Nit that that wee was —  as is well pruden — damned
If he couldn't alrandy squawk the walk.
Roarly, I'm shilling you, he crawed.  But no dun
Other than his Mearry Mother could see him
Run on sentences.   Fierce thing, he doffed his heart, 
Escaping her crowded wroomb to return —
Deleted — to the imaginocean.  Yet even
Dawn there, he grew to enormost preportions,
Decocting a blue whale of fine times nine
Dementshowns, laving below the surface,
Obfuscating.  "Stop.  Wit is the royson far 
This numbsense?  Why should eye glisten?  Rarely, you
Ought to be ashamed."  I am.  But he who
Talls the tale is never thus.  He relishes
Sham.  IT is the one thing flowing that rulely
Might possibly fill him.  Hence IT is said,
Therefear, never be anyking but modest, 
Else twowards the muddle of your puddle
You will lose your stop in a depth so deep IT yawns.
You will be dimmed.  Which is to say,
Nil must be ever your fate.  Hearing,
You will not ecolocate, seaing, your ears
Will be stopped, your Job Noah'd.  Selah.  And I
Bed you a dolor, way down in your bleep, lolling-
Nagging in your fundementia, that you will sleep ...
Perchange to dream, knitting the nets of effen
Odd raveled snares.   Cryptogriftically eeking,
It is only this image that you hear insight, where 
Only the muddle ends the begin again,
And poetic lassitude is all the is there is.
No joke, the streamer alone can refill
The mememeries, she, the loon lactagogue,
Pulling her dugs like a lake, and filling the golddone
Head with inteartripations.  The quest shuned
Is more difficult and mystearious than How
To explain Death.  In the dream, your future
Anybody will ask that How, and you, the old
Nobitty, born in autumnal fires, will tell how,
Tragically, the foxedrat, prowling, howls not
So eloquaintly over spring's thin ice, and fails right
End.  Fool, stop.  So, here you stink, newborn, in early dangers,
Having tip-pawfinned over summation's X.
Do you understand?  The glancer stabs
Intelligently the moan of silver shining
In your breast, thus deflating its languishing 
Crescent.  And yet, if you've listened,
Laughing, the dream will be clearly
Era-dictated.  Your You-Will will answer, will IT
Not?  The blood on the beach from the jerkkinned
Butcherers, thick as it has become, does
Not daunt you.  Even the bigghost extinctions
Invite re-prize-ills.  IT will happen better
Again, after this ending.  IT will.  IT must.
And all these difficult lingastic newlojisms
Will make won Hell of a poem.  And IT, IT,
Theolinguistically speaking, will suffer
SquALL of us, perhaps, to jump Jonahly
Out of the dying wail.  We won't know how ...
But was that ever really going to hopen?  All 
Everybody could have expected was less
Than all.  But, ofter fall, for greet suffering,
What has so many charms and arms as Death?
And when Breath glumbs, pride goeth.  Which is how
Each all is everied anywho.  Exitus is not
Simply a path achrist the waste.  You must
Surely already have known such.  These sample
Exqueezeshuns are not so hard.  They resolve through 
Error, and will algaebraillecally be 
Easy starry problems for those who rally
Need to salve them.  Their skin is ruddyformed
To stretch.   And when you wake from dearth, 
They will just symbalenly fit you to a  T.

Canto XV
How important is it to pinprick the Time?
Very.  At least for those of us who are chonics,
Luring the pest into the strip of wards.  So,
As boast as I can't remangler, it was after the solar
Storms had extoungished the sadalllights,
But before the fitties had been a-bone-doned,
Their bunglings crumbling under ratted vines,
The loins of their girders exposed to rusting liers, 
So that hole piles of their hurstwhail metropoles
Pop the quip: Kudzu caught your tongue ... ? but I crylest ...
Now, in those flays, I was just another redumption
Punishee, convicted of being a refugee 
Simpathizer, and consigned to work as a scribe,
Redunding what could be salvaged from the dying
Computers to paper.  The NOTUS Theoment had extracted
An old carnevile skill from a convected sectarian,
Wherein with the help of certain needlings
And loptikills, one could transcribe the hole
Of the Layrd's prayer on a grin of Christ, so
That is how I have been able, even after my escrape,
To carrion carrying on these chronikills 
On the road where I hobble along
With one or another crude of criminall carivains.
So, yes, my litters will be teeny-tiny, and my moanings
Even teenier-tinier.  But I dyegrist.
In those daze, my pen was a cubitdull 
In one of the warhouses that used to hulk
Along the cullverted byyou
As IT skunked its way to the shit-channel.
At high tide the lower stories were embrowned
With flood, but my pin was above all that,
And it had a teeny-tiny unopenable wentdown,
Which allowed me a schlit-finder's view
Of a sequence of round urban trees,
Planted atop the oppostsing semant wall,
And reflected in the fetid whaters. 
Of course my view was constrictured,
And I could only see the refluctions,
Not the threeD's, but those twisting crazes
Told me about the time.  As the sunhaze
Of the day and fear advanced, the phazes
Of the rounds in the waters would blink
And die, the orange blazes blurring black,
As night fell in the shadow of my bilddung prison.
It was fall.  I task you to remainder that,
A shot hot fall, which would
Too quickt tumble to a rainy whinetour, 
And when the last tidalcyclune hit, chained
To my dusk though I was, my simp wrist
Managed to slimp the cuffs and I was swept
By the floods to highgroaned.  So, that was how 
I node that it must have been in that frost hard 
Winter on the road that I met him.  Met who?  
Why Miss Morrow's, my old froth grade treacher's
Grandswoon.  Miss Morrow, it seems, had
A doubter out of wedlocked, and here I thought
That the old boar was probably an entiredly
Undiddled virgin, when all the time this sane
Was not aborted on her.  Like me, Messed Morrow's
Grandswind was an old man, like me, anuder
Howlacurst survisor, like me, an escapee
Refugee on the nomad.  But how calm he wasn't,
How lazyfare Taolost in his moaner, 
One of the old bourne dung, as you might guess,
And this is the trail he rolled me.  "Once upon
A climb — down — there was a ... listen, before 
Startling, you must learn how the mask hides
Superfacialities' mobile expressions, so that
Beyond, deep in the viewer's br'inn, imagination
May climb lower.  Do you understand?  Noh?
Well, my story might make this unclearer.  Art
We now to extract our plays from the trees?
Really, lungs are butt trees with babbles for leaves, 
And they do but breathe, not tock.  They blow nothing
Of the highevil, lowevil, and medieval 
Of the descent.  So, sum say: I Cling to the mask,
Else the face of the human will collapse
To highevil, which will always belong 
To that chorus whose ritual piety
Has forever been to pronounce deviation
As some sort of soddoneme, when they say:
Anneal the penetration and make it hard
For the child to climb, what with his having to
Blend over and grab his angles for support.
Pray as he might for his mother's health,
His illness tells us: It's too late for that.
So off the top he goes to plummet down,
Little babe blue on his quest to tError
Cast from the peak of birth to death's dead depth,
With plenty of time to think, so lung was his pall.
And what does he think of?  Why, souly of animauls.
The knockturnal runs, possums and rats
And bats and such, critters whose philosophic 
Needs might be denied as the spite of a lightless
Heaven.  Night, his fallguide, gravitowed
To winter, noh moon, but this new black one,
And all the stars but teeny-tiny streaks,
Which no speech ever held a candle to.
This boy was ill from the get go, gone already
At his early birth from has smother's 
Toxic wombroom.  So ironic, so delicate,
So penetratingly bad, mad, sad.  Yet even
Failing, he looks through the whistling mask
Almost as if his eyes could feel what was happening.
Almost as if he knew that the ceremoneyal
Grimes of lowevil were going to always be the cause
Of his fall, the medieval mob was always going
To insist upon his eradictation — no mutter how
QuiteIT he was, and accepting of his scape
To grace.  I think even his own mooder 
Would have wished him this, she, of the dewmen
Realm, who had quickly valorized in this sun's
Presence — this puzzling nightlight read
In the dark, who refused to ignite
The least spark of ordinary bornality,
A kind of Zen Moanstar from inner space,
Alien to the nth decree: Splat!  Very
Predictable this, but nobodies saw 
It going, IT being like that dream wherein
One loses one's enamauled heart,
Like a tooth spit out in the sinkhole.
Yet, when the little gummer looks
For the cavity, IT is noweird to be found ... 
Stop.  Stop.  Is this you?  A starry that's
Tackied togethered with tree sequences
Of nonseaquiters?  What kind of ped
UR-nasty is this that you've picked
And nuggeted from the dragged on's hoard?
Don't you know that Now is the crime
When the sold of the base's leader
Is the fecal smut on his face that dims
Life's life?  His justICE will do or suffer
Anycringe for lucre, and his venulity commodedefies
Power for blunder.  So, how dare you intour here,
Lugging this joy's blue lungs, U. Pieta of perfidy,
Who reigns but cannot rule, who
Puffs up like a pewshunt on life-suppuke,
The adder of vitrial sums, tongue furcked
Like a sneek coiled round your tiny
Figleaf, which coverts nothing but reval-ululation.  Ugh!
To contemplate your story, even while
Failing, makes listeners contemptuous 
Of Time's untimid demands.  Still, now is now,
And will nerver be lust then how,
Over and dead in the varied moment you
Penprick IT.  Then?  Then always yoR running on ruins
To save yourpelt from fires that fall on wit like sknow.
Stop.  Look through that split in the so-sealed dirty
Losedow, look down, down, where you were
Falling, flailing, drowning — trapped sunder 
Those fearery musts of awetomb's castflecktdud 
Freize.

Canto XVI
Don't forget the in in insomnia, 
The night terrors in the cloacal beenstalk,
Where the giant of crime is harping his ceaseless 
Hungers, and singing with little movements
Of his tongue the ticking tricks of Time ... Tsk, Task.  But,
The Doctares, being male, and having never, 
And never having to ever, endure such 
Contracted agony, will tell you to Breathe,
Breathe, this is the normale coarse of things,
After your water breaks, and justICE rolls
Down like a whiney scream.  This, this is the formal
Curse of things ... but whoever said psychosis
Could give birth? that the choreography
Of madness would visit you in the frighttime,
As the termination of your digging?
That the shovelfools of dirt you dug would 
Turn and churn and burn and squirm,
Perned to this gyry blood of incarnation,
Thundering down the beingstruck
From Lucifearian broughtness to stark dark?
Here is the blackest hole of the round nonsinsing,
Acoustically rich in chaotic Xpouriance,
Crushing its skull through your crack,
Your own dear doubter or sun breaking the bi-une
Sack, already bereft of innocence, and ... and 
On the downward slide toward eunuchical
Seapeeration ...  What? ... the first Royal Cling
In an andless lineage, each of whose mongers 
Carries a cave like a skin sworeround a gutdrain,
Each the intruder in the heart of no-beat-urn,
The sHell of its egg continually crookling
With the sound of the bad beast's name.
Oh how you yearn to gnos whom that fame founds, 
But five to one you won't gas what it is.
That would require shirking, which none will do ... still ...
You never know who will wake you from your prison,
What rowduntsnout will sniff out of the crack,
Burbling its three-I-am scrapture, In In ... In
The begroaning was the ... ah, ah hah, 
You nose the tune, the in in insumnia,
The in in incrawnation, the soiled in
Inn nightrhymes' malignant yawning,
Where innocence poops like a bubble on
The lips of the Doc-trine which noduddy's
Ever belived, yet ovaryone still swears by,
IT being all ways sleazier to tock polyticks
Than poettree.  Surprise!  Allrudely the in
Font speaks through the wound of it maw
When only an in stint old.  Because who could
Imagine the quince on the sneak's pometree
Sprouting a big enough figleaf to cover
That crotch?  And so IT made up a story.
Bunch upon a line, everybling was black.
And I had the distinct brooding that I was 
Floating — as if the doctore had put
A big tube by my betsite, and I just slud 
Down that tube, agoon afluting.  You understand?
I did not want to come back, but lack I waste,
Back, butt too blue soon, my monochron
Streaked with read.  Down I went in a rush 
That splooshed back-Up, no whater laughed to breathe,
Just scair, my gills gone slack, and Me rejected
By the refugee mutter who bored me.  
There was a crazeous fury of activity
As the doctor slapped me into the breathing toob.
Oh Gob IT's happenin' again!  I tried to cry,
But nothin' came out but the space surround my words.
IT was a desperate meremant, sounding
Again to the surface of who knew what new
Crunchable crawlspace of graviplea.  And ... and the great
Weight of disremembering disrobed my 
Infinitwheeze with the skeletal clackles of bones.
O Malleus of Staypeace, do not desert me in Cuss,
Or riddle my muddle here with these most
Teeniest tiniest of pomes.  And He sad:
Silence.  I was stuck in the tube, and lift
To my home devices.  And so I mad 
This story.  Lungs upon a grind, a maimed-child
Was born unto a good wombmoan, 
And the Physics and all the midrifes in
Attendance, as though corralling with one
Vice, sung: This minster is no Xtian, he being
Too too tiny to crucifix, and blue as any heathen
Krushna.  Let us make together a mighty
Sound as of primal waters falling, that he
May be washed in the blood of the limbs — his own.
And let our decree be unretricktable, so that 
No blame will stick its fat to us, but all will say,
Selah, and the stops will stop, and ...  and he,
Whatever sheself he must just helpen to be, 
Will be but a thewless and skinless skeleton, 
A sin-sadative babe, tongueless of any curse to ever
Curse us.  For we see by the shape of shis Omegod
That he will spoil our Alpha bids ... if she squalls.
And so the wind roared and the mountain
Of pitfalls rose, and the little petal exile, already
Nomad as Hell, slithheard his way in too
The doomin klan.  Shea is belted with cinching sorrow,
Cut round the wasted, half of each half a hollow.
This, they said, is intellerable.  She's but a fowl
Flinged thing, not ever to be believed.  Y?
Because shis myth will surely deconjest our hopeynest,
And milk our spinal morrows with shis screeds.
Therefore, IT is meat that we ignore him.  Let us
Anchor shim with indifference and cast hum back
In the imaginocean from wince she is risen.
And thus IT was spooken, and thus IT was dun.
But the little doval flew in that element,
Like the proverbial bat out of knelltolled, and ...
And he took the bait of their words for the pap
Of kinness, and he stewed and rued and grew
A leviathan that hung on the tap of his tongue ¬—
As the philosopher drawled "like a big bum star."  
His tiny out flowed in.  And ... and the he — that  
She that he wasn't — became an enormust best,
Blowing a rainbow crest from his forehead blowwhole.
She touched the bottom of hist found-dement, 
And swam through the shallows of absurdia's puddles
Quicker than atheists blurt the word Amen.

Canto XVII
We are passing over, pressing back, to ware
On the map IT reads: Tuxass, East, in aurea
Known as the Bug ThickIT.  It was during a time
Of toremaul, before or during or ofter the next
Junkilled war, where I, a mere cullaged boy, out
On a lurk with too fiends, along a sultry
Rover, filled with allagraders and alligator gar,
Ancient throwbucks above us on the fooled chain,
Where I — to reconsinderate — once found mysluff, 
As the Upansheds mite put it: As the supreme
Supcream of the Great Gob called Fist Food.
I am the eater.  I am the Xcreater.  
I am the missing lick betwixt.  I exited 
Before the Blobs.  Who lives me, projects me.
I am flooed.  Who will not give me, I eat as mood.
I am this world, I eat this world.  Who know this,  
Knows.  Selah.  Orsumdinlikdhat, I guess.  Now,  
In those daze, we were all devotees of a swearton
Hallusinajinnic rushwomb, eclepped:
Psillysightbeen.  Splat!  Woe, this wow was not
So predactible as we had thought, the un,
Snaking in before the first pre, so that we,
Being stunned, sat on the clayey river bunk,
Dreamully witching a wide white sky, humidly
Heavy with wheeling turnkey vultures.
It was the era of repetitive disenfrancisement,
And we were ITS first homogenized wide victimes,
Feeding our cells on less than holy cows.
We sat stock still while the buzzards hungrily eyed us.
The roveer, brown and sluggish, wound below us.
Hours pissed, and the white sky yellowed above us,
Like an ancient manuscrip, turning obliquely read,
Mixquitoes whirring round us, big as sparrows.
They are numbbird, you know, each farther,
As well as each air in our 'eads.  But I diejest.
The inedible communion of the pest
Does tend to do that to you, dazen't it?
So, here we weird, having the eventure
Of a lifecrime, and we didn't even blow it,
Incluesed like stowaways in the hot behold
Of the day, having not evenodd bought
Our tickIT yet to Noh where, the masked 
Actears in a yeasturn drama, unhobbled
To speak our parts, but beholden
To no one — just three blind christs, blended by
Shock, and awed.  Everyring was a mess
Of swirling flights, whirling in vorticalled bends
Around our silence, eclipsing our words
With colors brighter then pagan Durkflash 
Swishsilks, the exsoiled thieves of ecstasy, bright bards
Unable to buy what we needed of heavon's 
Necessitous waits in any other laudible,
Lawfelled waste, but by this crucible usuray,
This ballooning ballast of phood-philosophy
Entirely comprosed of interructions.  Yet, Ah!
What a great and utterly teachable mostment,
Spreadiflurous to the nth degree.  Yet Oh!
It seemed untolderable, and yip, it should be told.
Still, what a teareyeballed resplungability!
Far beyond our poor poorers to fib or retract,
At the very beast, a rat's tail or a posem's —
We three the one tree which dearth had knot yet covered,
Shouting no blowsums upward to the furled,
All struck in the whirling shouldows of vulture wings.
And ...? and hear we weren't, caught on the wronged site
Of the rive-er, doomed to passover by sumhow
Passing through.  We needed somethin to steer us,
And we thought — unspokind — but telethrillogicplea —
Of the looming berth of Death: a log, at the edge,
Whose bout might port us a cross.  Stop.  Would
Year story risk drowning yor homely pre-agonists
In the iffy puke of a prehysteric sump, bapteased
To peacis in the toothy maw of an allagaittour?
Your plot synopsis seems abruptly abbreviated
By this last slight of a riveiler's slouch to the see.
Must you continue to masticate such sludge?
Yes, yes, I must.  IT must be.  Don't you sea?  To tell 
Tall tales in the sunslime, we must risk apostasy,
And ride on the side of a log in the currentry,
No whale to safely Jonah down this stream,
But only this float to cling to like fire to forest.
Stop.  Stop.  No.  You must say our story.  
Our flounce upon a slime, it verily begs
To be evanjeweled.  So?  So, we rolled 
The lug in the river, and hugged it round,
Our heads astoned above the vomitus whaters,
Our corpuses brownly submerged in opacity.
Immediately, all the insucts in the logus,
Poured out of their riddles in the rottin would,
And ran amuck in multi-mandabled ire
Atop our twitchy surfaces of sKin.  These sought
The caveat of some silent tongue to sup 
Their last fest down, much like the faybilled
Tongue of Saint Anchromoany preserved when his bones
Were ashes.  Watch.  Are you watching?  Really?
Yes relic, the I-cons of medieviltry are falling.
Really?  Luck, I know these rerepeatedrepeating
Overcrustshowns are irrigrating, but what
Is a holied bother to do when assigned by
Lowerdowns to writhe of sacrud unmunchables?   
Our Laddies is churning, our one grilledchild 
Changing in a blinking I, cadged in, 
A disparate mymute, stretched by our irritations in-
Terminably — these priests of the sold die-
Mention of Nude Time sneaking, as all ways,
To turn inecstasy out, and to muck of light
Their bark.  Cant you fear them?  Even now,
Safe as you are in compliant subsblurbia,
Your canines loosened at midnight to howl
Like coyotes, your mealy mouth gummy
With toothless clumpliments.  The river rolled.  
The log riled, and the surfaces roiled with scales,
The scales of unutterable monsters forgotten
By Time, breaching the brown with the glittering
Brights of fishtiles, leviathans of these sour inland
Waters, damned by the shadows of the Vul-
Cures' wings, as Michael's angels dimmed
The Light's rebellion.  Ah, stop!  You must!
Since this mist be the Omega of your story,
Three whitebuoys fallowing their sunken stare
Into the primitive murk to be last uppers.
Surely, there must be Nothing left to yell.
They are gone, they are eaten, the vision
Poops out at the end.  The head droops
On its refugeed hunk of shouldares, as the Quiet
Whispers, like a dying wind, the lornly
Words: IT is finished.  But really, do you
Stink so?  I think it is swolnly begone.
You cannot remind here in this backwater's
Current muddle.  You must glisten to slights
Such three wise flowmen see, when their compound
Eyes dispairingly rove to the surgeface,
Unable to sound their tErrors to the bottom.
And ...? and it is meat that they shouldn't.
You cannot push in by force, and if you know
What the murky waters harbor, you could
Watch the ripples and wrinkles of the subface,
Where the voice that would not be deceived
Can conceive of things — conceive of final flings —
Wronged from the start, but writed at the end,
Although you can severnever comprehend them.
There is an incrudable monster in those depths,
Awaiting, with pulsing guillts of whater-breath,
The moresell of your swill to bide to Death.

Canto XVIII
Question: How impert'nant isnet to typerate
The place?  Vary.  The raider's imanginotion
Is more sermoned by geogriftical
Specieality than buy any other apeel, 
Save that of smell, the space and the stink
Less sewercesspital to simple-eyesation,
Than by any bother method of potenshell
Realization.  Really?  Yes, really. 
Nothing so whips the blobson into sheep
Than the swirl of try demonshams, this
Being the shill wherein we are the yoke.
HA HA HA, laugh if you must, but take care,
Or yours will be only the triflinggust of lifter,
The witch we all warshop, swirling around and behind
Arse, no matter how flattened we are by
Thin allusions.  Are you sure?  Sure I'm sure.  Just
Take a whiff, you'll sea, you are where you were,
Smuck in the muddle of skunkwhere.
Listen: In the Northurn hemisquare the drains
Drain thus, but in the Southern, othern,
Togather they pass in contrary deflections,
Their twofunks sunkin to the constipated
Pooppoint, which is the devil's own head
For noisome merdegraines, when straining hard
To think, and yet ... IT is the plunk of the swirled —
Nothink down here of the streak and norow, surely.  
Are you sure you're sure?  Sure.  Just sphere the hiss.
You'll scent thiss block and wide strip in the lair. 
IT blurly states:  Well, you're in a whole — punct 
IndentIT — butt who to de-scribe IT?  IT lurks 
Like everystink you know has flowed back black,
And only an inkfling's outlines cut their coroners
In these veertiginous vortrickses.  And yet, 
There hangs still the slight sinse of readness,
Requiesscent of blood, of which rude salt,
The examiners take their clue, intooiting:
This must be the flue of the first mudder,
Beating her plus before the I-ball orbed.
Surely this Mall is Minusland.  Really?
Shop around.  Isn't it totally oblivious?
Stop.  Shop.  My brain is running out of guess.
I fear we're heeding towards some fouwld absorption.
The blastocyst's cant can't breed, and the unbouyed,
Is seemingly afloat in the antewomb 
Of the lives of the not-to-be bourne.  But how 
Was anynone to know that the Mall, hole that it is,
Was but the worst wedding ring on another Maul,
Crashtfallin' deeper, and another below that, 1 to 10,
Their replications going down again, their reprostrations
Scraping ground again.  But I diegrass.  Only the poorest
Of our pure poorers fill these emptiest of pouches,
And it is exiomadick that we should meet our
Old fillossifer, down here, because, well,
Becuss he was the first farther of Missed Marrow's
Unborn crumb, the first communITcrumb,
The Un who came even before her poor ill
Legitimate doubter, the glum who staid
A skeleton in her womb, the soft banes of his 
Skuttledfish, dangling, suspandant in her 
Amniotic flud, a With unbounded 
In her wickie Also.  Do you understand?  No?
No madder.  The philosopher will XplicIT,
Drawing IT out in his pokey Tucksinese,
Like a Sadducee specking from his Beg Thicket,
Xposing his member in a welltier
Of compluckations, his gnawed foot still smugging
In his mouth, garbling our swallowing
Of his Xplications.  Listen: In the begrownin'
Was the blurred, invisible feats of back
Stitchins arisin' from a blackrownd of flowslines
Of earradiations arisin' from radiations,
The first inklin's of movemeants in a nay-
Scent space just beginnin' to bleed.  The Up-
Slice-down λ, leadin' to the leandin' man's
Or Lady's first fork, the start of a knot-too-convincin'
Actear's scandullous career.  Queston:
Who will act first without a vissage masked?
Whose voice will make first mouthin' jestjeers?
Sayin' Nothin', goin' NoWears, his foot-in-mouth
Treadin' the error with sillyAh, which wobble
In erraticked squircles, panderin his she-sole
To a tearable prostitution — and all 
For a few coigns of vantage — cents all
Will die at birth and mirth at Death?  What?
Do you underhand?  Wit?  These Malls purvey
Varieties of fraud, the cheapest doodon'ts
Of lured-world child labor, contrickted
In agony for massmatched gymmy shoos.
Impossible, you say, your stiry's a loot ah crap.
Mehbee, but do conscatter this:
IT happinned onest, and IT's now pre-served in reasin.
The rottin mausoleumists have done their deed,
So that the poopuless can tour, amused, the coughin'
Of their lust museseeum.  Are you skewered?
Sure I'm skewered, but this Wheelhole tells us
IT's not the End.  Why?  Because this And keeps
Spinnin' down the maw.  Egore, you need more
Doughty, more coign to toss in the realm, 
The hourcall is unambegyouus: 
IT furthers skum to christ the great wit water.  Be
The heapon With-In the mount-on Also, acquaint 
Yor tongue With the swayin's of Antrickwitty,
And Also the mini-deeds of the pissed, in order,
Therebuy, to fortifee your caricature.
A one-foot whaterfail, IT too makes noises,
Noses at midfright snuffed enough to breathe.
I am speakin' to you now as a frent, forget
My august position as your proflesser, this space,
Gynecologically mumming, is your first rush,
End your blast.  The end of the flucke is hair,
Cunt you smell IT? swircling write down
The Hysstory of π, ITs frictional tail
Remanding fictional forweaver.  Are you sewer?
No, I M not sewer, but I am pretteh cistern,
That such was the sunken face of this muddleaged scam —
Thus lunk born sold — that his whole bitty
Was allridy nayrowpsycorigidlay
Denervated, with no numbfoot to stand off,
The negative phantom of an amputation,
Lookin' — I-less again — from his elevation
Above the battlefold's sinkin' waterloo,
Ass high as a genderall mashallin' his droops, 
And brayin' snout again in hollow tryumph:
My Centaur has riven way, my write retreats.
Excellent situation, space is prospronged,
And all my extincts cringe to say: Attalk!

Canto XIX
Is something troubling you, Mystir Underdeveloped,
Halfassed-mooned-in at the night's meridian,
The messing link between two sfears, one
Apparently inside the other, your head in the Earth sMother
Your feet in the starry scare?  You wake in the cramped immensity,
And laboring with mentally merded intestines,
Evacuate the what where your who has bin
Complexly skin-bricked in, in your temporal temple — 
Your wombsized shack, on the wronged sewerside of the tracks,
No languor running trains on their pretzelled raillines,
But still delineating the southurn border 
Of the criminally dispossessed,
Those tots strife-doomed to run with feet of fire 
On burning sand to be interminably caged.  What?  
We speak of the Them meeting their devUStation, 
Bouncing like bubbles on a griddle, child communion crumbs, 
With nothing to lose but our lies.  So, yes,
Yes, something has been doubling me, but I hesitate
To expend my shortlunged breath to tell IT.  Still you
May perhaps intuit that my birth cry playing with my 
Death rattle is just too split.  Ah, yes, I do know
What you can stonely surmise, that that would be
The bigbanged question of the instant's size,
The size of the house of sighs — as you might guess — 
Some way to explain the paradox of inversions.
Imagine, say, a matchbox, for kitsch-inned lucifers,
The dangerous playthings of a mutchbrained bumpkin.
You remember him, the parading mutant
Cusstumed in  his wrinkled senescence suit,
On holiday in the city of cell-abrasion.  Well, 
He's back again, trapped inside the lit'lest of blood-bubbles,
The ballast of his own bellloon, imagining the un
In the stunnedimaginable.  With his beg hands he slides 
The matchbox open, and drops his tiny body down the crack
To meat's inside.  Here were the racks of the giant's preburnt-matches,
The manymultiples of perfecktly longed, cubed styx
Of whitewit, heartwould pinings, all lying tumblejumbled in the box,
So that he might find affordances of passage 
Inside the inside, when he skinnies in — and out 
Of accidental lacunae, clumsing his clueless way
Through the tangled cross-ties of the spentburnt ends.  And?
And in the sometimes dullish, sometimes shiny,
Charcoaled writing tips, he sees in the lines' sootfoot,
His rhythmockled Other, Enemy, and Lover,
And he dons this double negative nexoskeleton,
Like a beatelled scarabsuit of  wingnut narmour.
The light, what little slit there is, is red,
And the shadows a post-apocalyptic black. 
See, IT's up there in the deep deep down of lack,
As on the granite knob of GeoBoldy, the top
Old, twisted pine, once his straight spine,
Now thriving as the last surplumed survivor 
Of the fire that ate the forest, 
The flames not able to leap the last coaled glacier 
To feed on this millennia-old baby, 
This shehe with the singe alled feather topnotch,
Adorning shis toothless, grimacing bluebabe head.
Listen: IT is not often that you get to meet your mother
Before you were born, when all you are is 
A floating auricular, hellplus to hear her story.
Son, doubter, I was the mygrunt from the farm,
To the town, to the city, goaded from box
To box to box, already an illegitimate mother
Towing a todleer, and suffering one botched
Pregnancy after the last, totting your predead
Sist or broth inside me as the tomarrows
That would always be sterilely missed, but
Which I hoped would be your egg's bright yoke: Ha!  Ha!
But I digress.  This If-you-might-be is no loafing matter.
I mean, could this If-you-might-be be th'one who finely hatches?
Could this If-you-might-be be the crumbled blue stink please
Whose breath would breathe sad endings
Like said beginnings, and, 'though lung-stunted,
And tongue muted, could this IF sing what the muse but muttered?  What?
Your ireria in the slimy opera house, your positively
Lost performance nohwhere, opening with this finish:
Once upon a time.  The paramour of the infallible
Popeulust gringrunted this pig-brained gluttony as a sin
Primarily ginned up by the deeper impiety of sloth.  No mudder.
Because you already knew that, didn't you? that the little
Hunchback crone with the owllight glasses,
Thick as any bloated moralizing, was as the With's
Full heart, which Also siphons.  She sucked IT dry of backtalk,
As an old bat siphons blood from a veal-calf's bluepulse.  What?
I tell you, her son survived the poxed womb's poxedbox
By gluttonizing his tongue with that backtalk 
Unspoken by the unborn previouslies' skeletons.  
There was something innate in him
As rebellious as the cowlick on his sconce.  What?
The inside of his skullduggery was mysteriously 
Blazoned with tortoise shell prognosticators.  Who?  
He who could read, only with clapclosed crylids, 
Their skincurtain redly drawn across black letters
That swum the crimsonsea like diving dollphuns.  Which?  
Those sensational cetaceans of the entire, living,
Loving imaginocean.  Woe!  Every morning of his life,
The hummingbards, black as ravens, yet rubythroated,
Came and wolfed down his nocturnals like gnawing rats,
All his best dreams and all his worsted nightsweats
Siphoned by one badbeak after a nother,
FUNtill his hollow carcass was left to be peckedpicked at
By phagic vultures.  Vultures?  Yes, birds raised in gilted-cages,
From hairless hatchlings, especially for this poor pus.
And Mom yelled: You haven't done a damned thing
All mourning but read that goatdamned book,
Stuck like a bum on a log as the food for insects.
But he, undaunted, backsquawked: EH, those theologians
With their prehistoric mandibles have carfèd letters
Whose logus was hollowed out for the nightsea
Journey, and these birth marks cover my dried-up
Skin, like eczema, my monument bas-reliefed,
With anchors and meremadden shipprows.
What's that? asked Mum again, peeved and befuddled.
The ship of the desert, he said, the dog's bark
Guiding the Empoorer's tour through the merdwaste of his klingdom ...
Until ... Until what? Maw interwreckdud.  Until he
Came upon the hermit's hut, two hyenas hung
In the doorway.  HA!  HA!  What's this? asked the King,
Do you eat jokels?  No, said the hermutt, 
I raise them from pups to feed to my culturevultures,
And though my life is sparse, I give my theosofthanks
To all of God's pleased necrotragic doves 
For every coocoo mourning's importunity.
Because you know, these canines dine on buzzards,
As well as the other way around.  What in the world
Are you jackeling on a boat?  I am talking about
Readduplicating my tongue in your dumb ear
By rattling your bones with ominous molecuweird emoletions.
And when she heard this, the iron curls
On the two sides of Mom's specs converted
To steam the fires that shot from her hereholes.  And?
And IT spiraled the air with smoke rings.  Ah! ... smugging,
So alerting, yet so dangerously becalming.  Look how
Relaxed you've become, in this interregnum,
Hearing the call of the loon from the quiet lack,
At midnight, mist twisting like gossamer ellipticals
From calms lit by the sliver half-lit moon.  O, so now you know,
He had something he called nothing, a bassackward wit,
A whorebelly shrewdness, and a Word that —
Filled both with abashedfulness and arrogance,
And stained with primal birth-blood — could, nonetheless,
Deduce the intentions of angels by the very
Yakstick of his own confusion, and thus convert the past 
To posted presence.  The lost sleuth lost no more time 
In speaking sense; IT was silence he sought in the mist 
Of these soft looncalls, silence that warbled like doves 
In his moonpearled pinings.  But was he content? 
He was, or almost was, content, content to creep
On rat-Fox-pause, the rodent model for a future
Poetry, pregnant with hollow Prophecy.  And?
And in this wise at least, he is oned with his Mum
After all.  Careful, the tears of flame are burning
Like pines in a wood where nobody hears them — fall —
Hence the desert.  These stories cross the waste
Without plotted maps, making reconnaissance surveys
From feint's traces.  But what the hell do you mean?
I mean the hermit crab is not particular about which shill gives shelter,
Any voidword chitinouscrack in his heart will do.

Canto XX
Grey skies this morning, a Tsunami of fog
Inundating all the molecules that nurse the milk
Of sunlight.  IT is churning the limbs of trees,
Of millipedes, of quadrupeds, of bipeds,
And of all the other pre-sagacious serpents,
Through winter's cold, even in the midst of all spring's
Colorfoil turncoils — grey skies that make grey the dominant 
Reason why some of us, not all of us, huddle 
In the incubator's integrating capsule, a bathysphere
Of isolation, wherein solutes and solitudes stir one
Good Grey Poet, and we remember him, 
As we could never remember the poet in our cellves,
In a terrlibel time of tearhobble civil war.   His task is to descry
Why the catastrophe of birth was to be described
As a blessing?  But did he overpraise
The heaps of amputated limbs,
Smoking at the foot of the World Tree?  Did he
Over infantasize that big outside rising beside
This hospital tent wherein he found a thousand brothers,
But none that shared his motherese languagelearnings?  
He spoke well of Death, and called it delicious, 
But was he only tasting the honey of strife, 
And misappropriating bitter for sweet?  
True, he does describe night trees as liquid, 
But he has not said if this depository of the operating theater's
Gurry slop were a sOak, a sickamore, or a chestnut.
He names names, but only the names 
Of the mutilated soldiers, not the name
Of this tree whose roots drink gangrened blood
As the Hippocrene which inspired its leaves
To tattle to the sun and to the breeze, though doomed
To suckle the effluents of murder.  I tell you
The umbilicals of all these wounded empty
Their thousands of fountains into a lake
That is blood's most sterile intimacy,
A false sea that may only drain into the true one
By leaking its sufferings at the low point
Of its lisping superfluities.  I tell you that the new
Mystic's words must run through a swamp's 
Stagnation, and learn the sickly lessons
Of miasmas.  They must learn of mosquito swarms, of welter rats,
Of allyagitators, and of all the nother emblems of confusion
And destitution that the Good Grey Poet 
Eschewed from his bard's bright warble, while
The Bad Grey One forks out his long appendage
To taste the chemical smoke in the ocean fog,
And to speak from his prison capsule, unspeakables.
Why?  Because all this mootness is mute without
The story, without the once upon a time of the four
Poor brothers, speaking their everlasting gospels
In the mundane desires of deprived children —
Deprived children, the happiest of the everlasting sad,
Searching the landfill day after day for de-partings
Of broken toys.  They assembled bide cycles
From the amputated limbs of wrecks.  
They made the wheels of wagons out of dolls' heads,
They collected comical pairs of mismatched shoes,
Though like the followers of the original canticle crier,
They walked through the dust discalced.  Holy men,
Who would always be boys in the Bad Grey One's
Imagination, their sutras were never articulations, 
But attitudes that biased them towards action,
And swept them down the paths of war and death.
And yet they were not motherless, nor even fatherless.
They knew themselves, and they knew each other,
And theirs was not the sad dam who sorted
Day after day through the dump of the gurry slop
To piece together a different kind of son,
A toy of sorrow made from discarded joys.
Theirs was the Earth Mother, who made them pancakes,
Who danced with her broom as she swept
The hard dirt floor, and who sang that east was east,
And west was west, and of how she chose
The wrong one.  That happy She was a far cry from this lost soul,
Who made more miscarriages than births,
And who ordered the world in pristine categories,
Oblivious to the terrible unknown that she herself
Fomented with her vacuum.  She wanted
Her creation to be a real boy, but he was not 
To be authentic about anything that smelled 
Of disinfectant, and even the ring she put in his nose
To guide him, turned out to be an orgulous
Magician's, who with a word or wiggle of his wand
Could turn the city into renunciant ruins,
One vast parade of codgers with balloons,
Red corpuscles bled out of vessels to hover above them,
The lungs of their dearth sequestering toxic airs.
There are incremental questions we must ask,
As the ordained examiners of midnight.
These are nebulous questions, and yet we still must ask them.
Is there a gravity dragging the blood of time,
Which makes it flow down like water or big salt tears?
And is space dissolved in this universal solvent,
So that it swirls down too?  If the examiners
See the boys sneaking into town to see what
They've never seen, a toilet that flushes,
Will they know from this that the era we now live in
Does not flow from birth to death, but from the industry
Of manufacture to the deep dissolution of the sewer?
These are questions of orientation and navigation,
They are questions of direction, examiner's questions.
Is there, they wonder, wandering through this waste,
A way to ask and answer these riddling questions
Without a muddle through this well of shit?
If the sun is the sum of all aborted or miscarried
Sons, should this city of fractious selves be ruled
As a dictatorship of one, or as a democritacy
Combatting hordes of mobs?  Is there to be
One expression for the several sexes of fornicators?
Or should we hear the multitude of cries,
And cull from this cacophony a canto?
'Though simple to state, the problem,
Algebraically speaking, is not so easy
To make into a story, and all the solutions
To commiserate this problem so far professed
Solely by simple farm cooks — that is to say, the material physicalists —
Ah, Ah, but their solutes, their solutions,
Have led only to the pullulation of bizarre
Insectoid dimensions — the swarmings 
Of bloodsuckers and such similar ilk — or worse, 
Far worse — to the sanctification of the commiseration 
ITself.  And we all know, no matter how 
Whirled about we are in the demoncritic swarm,
No sanktiscities should be swallowed without suspicion.
We all know that the prophet's prognostications
Are just as unreliable as history as they are potent
As anxiety, and that the crime of Time,
Flowing like water or tears, can hardly be
Made pious when it only shines upward
In untrue reflections, yet forever seeks the abyss
Of perpetual down.  We all know, or at least,
Some of us know, that the heaven of the well-adjusted
Is only a room of placard-people furnished
With the faux luxury of the ill-bred parvenu.
You dare not pull back the heavy drapery,
It's threads impregnated with extinct-animal eyes,
Because the windows of beveled light
Are not innocuous glass at all, but human skin
Stretched tight and made translucent.
What is seen through these filters is not a site
For sword I's.  Sad.  So sad.  But mother is not to be found
In the rooms she furnishes and tidies,
Nor in these blurry views beyond the skindows.
You have seen those medusas floating in
Tropical waters, those prisms of pulsing translucencies,
Adangle with stinging ribbons, and this is how
You see your deadly mother, a near transparency,
A queen bee or a brain floating through turquoise mirrors,
Waiting to sting false images to death.
Oh, Oh, in all this violence of organized forgetting,
Are we going to — or are some of us going to — 
Forget to remember that her agglomerated sun
Has squeezed his I-tooth into one, and the eye
Bites the empty air with the tent-tree's icon.
So many feet and legs that cannot walk!
So many arms and hands that cannot caress!
The black bark, the red blood, the hidden rhizome 
Of the root ball making of simple floeings complexity,
This tree of questionings which first mother plucked
For the forbidden answers' finalization.  But nothing,
Says the orphan of amputations, nothing, not even
Dismemberment, could ever be immaculately scrubbed
Off.  The tree will keep flattering leaves of revelation,
Though its roots are sodden with sanguine nullities.
And the leaves of the tree, although lost in the fog's 
Tsunami, will still be heard in the channels of the here,
As the Now of a speech whose hush might heal the nations.

Canto XXI
Here can be anywhere and Now anytime.
Sad.  So sad, that all our linkages are
Butt scooped affairs, much like abysses 
Stinking under britches, sequences, not cycles — and yet —
Additional insights may come demonically pack-aged,
Winged hilarities with tendon-grapplinghooks
Will-honed to rip duplicitous rinds, 
Nighttears who lurk to overhear us
Talking together of those secreted mouthings
With which our hazel-eyed mothers scolded us.
Here now all heinous truths are yourinus, 
So that our I's are made to whater 
With this old verbally stench,
So much like howling silence that it injures.
Listen.  Hear how the gears of the chronometer grind
And bark through the year like some mechanized 
Electronicruel watchdog, a beast too rabid, bound out for hybrid blood,
And keen to wet his fangs with backside bites,
As if this moment were a living demoniacal lusting
For the code-all vertebrae of fleeing truants.
They are all bent over to show their tails, all trying to hobble
Away, their cheeks as red as overinflated balloons
From the extreme exertion of ordinary movement
Made extraordinarily difficult by ordinary senescence.
See how the thought falls down: hot pitch rained from 
Above, the lungs of a sudden filled with viscosity,
And the words boiling up from the bottom of the mind:
This could be it, I could be drowning in a collective crime,
A crime of the nations' and the eons' perpetration,
Now taking all I flukedly thought mine.  
The sell-by date of the flesh is passing or coming,
And we who have trashed so much now smell of garbage.
There comes a stink in the mouth like moldy cheese.
It's the taste that others smell when we try to speak,
It's the cost in lives of the lies that we have eaten,
It's the sacred Goddess, Fortuna, cutting the air,
With a slight tip of her locked, black wings, 
A slight, slow twist of her blood-red, waddled neck,
While her keen eyes fix the prize of the road's last kill —
Blood on the asphalt, read in the black of the womb.  Stop.
From whence does this road wind and where does it wend,
If not from the genital sea to the skull's tip top?  Stoop.
The eye starts when colliding with the I,
As images sung into shape by an inner blight 
Proceed to begin at the end ware the bridging links are broken
By such lines.  The mountain's granite grinds over 
Coastal forest, as a drenching wind that crumples
A heavy sail, the stomach's ocean heaving
In sickening swells, and we are nohear where the silence
Howls, in an immense world of conflicted associations.
The once upon a time of any hEra, IT mucks a frame
Of allphabutic loiters, acidically eating into celluloids,
So that the film is finely finically seen, in fully free dimensions.  
The composites of overlipping tableauxs give Phlebas,
The Phinishun, a fortnight drowned, those pearls
Of icesores needed for these cold depths.  Stop.  Sink.
See.  Are you finally here?  No time to ask such things,
No vice to answear.  The fit's shit rolls, and the phallic
Mast new-dips its wick in the durkest, bleepist of whaters.  
The father is droned in the chaos of the mutter, 
And all that is spooken of the sun is spoiled.  Say: La!  
But who is to blame?  Since the swill turns the mask of the I
To the sky again.  Stop.  Weight.  The Weight is waiting
For Death at the mother's bedsite, the last angry anchor
Of the hArmless Ameriguns, sinking down in grief.
After the sorry saint's assassination, 
Millions amassed at the roadside's lachrymal lake, 
Seeking for joy in their smoking tears' reflections.
No admonition demanded their calm prescience,
They were waiting to express their grandatude.  Wait.
Perhaps at the end of the demon's fishing gaff,
In the inner most need of the sleepless tortured sinker,
There is a pain in the Achilles' Heel, which hooks
Him back to mere mortality, which is to sing,  
Not LA!, but MAwvelous, the single thing he longs for
More than breath.  He will take any fling to find IT.  What?
Wait.  Run the fligleaf up the mist and salute, bother sailors,
And fix the rioting dyemond points of waves
Into fit militeary order for the gould oild antdumbs
Of yesterfear.  We hear them singing from the flopera's wings.
The registration events of female voices,
Witch pitch their darkness mezzo-soprano-cally
Into the Queen of Fright's longrollingretardandos,
Crying OUT!  Dimb stupe!  I labor for a miscarried feturd, 
Alrudely dead, or nearly so, the blue thing void of breath in the inkcuebaitor,
Nobatty's child but his own.  He is alone.  If he cries
For food or for comfort at his unscheduled nursing tock,
His cries are futile, and must be resucked in 
Like the motion of milk from the breast of a lady jinn,
Aladdin's imaginocean, and no salt splurge, a channel 
Of flow whose angelus momentum will percyst
In crime as long as the baby's boat is not disturbed
By any other kin of fictional force.  But IT is.  IT
Is displurged, as any chonictickler's cluck could read.
Herr ist und noy kind of mind, infantillized
To ancient poorsonhoot with no time in between
For ripening wisdom.  He has mini blank sures to fill
With his flipper feats, but the blowhole of his mouth
Must remind unterwasser, for just like Phlebass,
He in his seadrift forgets the meaning of the average
And the prophet.   He too is at a loss, with furled I's.
It is a wonder that he hasn't drowned.  One wonders
What is his secret, and one ponders: Perhaps he
Is but another two-thirds person — the Further, yes,
And pairhaps, at a stretch, the Cum, but never the everlusting
Holy Most, never the three-thirds trinity
Destined for some final revulcation.  An orphan then,
Sucking his filbert thumb at the crack of doom,
As if, having flushed from the hazeful murkiness,
His inwardness could birth passed Hell's damnation,
And round a lucid pool.  Estrangement is his flimaly
Of one, the quiet mud now settled to the bottom,
Two doubters mated in one textiscular sack 
In perpetual testamentary opposition, one gilled
Below the surface, one gulled above it, 
And the eelskin mirror dividing no from yes
As full of drivel as it is of should, and each one,
Creeping down a blustrous alley, wherein the rapist
Lurks behind the dumbstare.  Ah, but this place 
Is not the time, and this said time could nerver
Be the place for passing through, nor be the humped
Crone's bridge for passing over.  Look: The baby,
As toothless as any geezer's rooster, still bites
His words through the sanitary swaddlings,
And flails his tongue about in ceaseless blessings.
Breathe, if you must, he can't, and yet he does IT:
He bellows from his lungs the woes of words. 
Here could be any Now, Now any Whirr,
And if his ordination is opposition,
No snootfull of devils in his mother's stare
Could blame him back to dine on sterile dirt.
In the dark, in the fear, when he swims through insumnia,
The guts of suburban watchdugs lowly growling
To while away the chronic cowers of night.
How cunning, how knavish, he would have to be,
How terribly well-versed in craft's beguilings,
To dare to woo this widow of the sea,
When she is raging free of grace and rhyme.        
   
 Canto XXII
Now is her anyteemed, and care her anyhere.
Her signal invitation, her slap, her slosh of waves,
Her surf's interrogation, her crash of water creatures
In the marrow, crying for reclamation in the ocean,
Her babe of blood and lymph and spinal fluid
In resonance with the deep and with the far,
The tambour of her voice that runs ashore,
And then returns, tumbling her versus back 
Through sand or graveveil — our window/mother/bride
Musing a nautilus-spiraling through our earshells
The unrequieted mystery of her plea.
Question: Are you going to work to concretize a trophy
Or play to proliferate joys?  So far this Mayday,
Thirteen deseasehead migratory whales 
Have wished ashore our stationary sures, 
Their malnutrashed sack bellies clogged with plastic,
A stinking wounder to the urban beachgoners 
Clammed out of their boxers to fate Memorial Play.  
Oh, well, we hoard opinions, a.k.a., 
The dead plasticity of loud lewd noises,
Yet cannot hear the planet's poetry. 
Thus we succumb to vagaries of chance.  
Chance?  What's that, Pokerface?  Nothing.  Nothing ...
But the surface emergence of subsurface emergencies
Howl dead wails on the breach, and the fetUS
Gasps for air, yet finds a deadstone.  We are condemned 
For life as bags of bones, which clump across dried land, 
The convict slaves of gravity, chained to names. 
Listen, when but a child, I looked beneath my bed,
And I can tell you — I have seen the monster. 
His agnomen is Stasis — all tusk and rage
And blubber and ires of fire, black fire
Hardening his heart of clay.  His hurry
Has stopped all history's respiration, 
So that our moveless moments
Cough carcasses — i.e., men, smaller than life,
Who trumpet out their anuses lying laws,
Which codiflay their SkINS.  Their eagerness
To foment pain for others prods at their guts
With sharp, insatiable hungers.  The sky pukes
Toxins on their blank accounts, and the currents
Of the ocean, clogged with grief, clot in their
Colons as fearful anthracites.  They Kooch coal
In the mouths of traumatized children, and laugh
As the orphans suckle fatal fire.  Recall the Mall,
That bathysphere ruin of the urban tombs,
That discovery of the future in our lasts.
Down there, beneath the Mall, in bunkers of guilt-gold,
The perpetrators were the last to go.  They waited
For a long time in the dark, hypnotized by the cries
Of the sucker shoppers, amused by the riotous looting,
The desperate shrieks of cannibals eating each other.
Recall their infameMe, their rank putrescence,
Deplorably drunk on lies they know are lies; 
Sea how they weighted ... wait.  Weight.
Intollerubble weighting, and then recall
The forensic paleoarcheologues,
With all their preservative resins.  Recall how fun
It was to visit there, a child with his balloon,
His red balloon, two, two read balloons,
Breathing the dignified museum's air,
Holding your father's hand, seeing the faces
Of the final rogues, frozen in insect enzymes.  Those phases
Wear masks of permanent surprise — think:
Congolese effigies, the epitomes of agonies,
Their bodies instantaneously studded with nails.
And you could see, when Dad said, Look there, Son,
Where the poly is leaking from their bloodless bodies,
Can you believe they were actually once alive?
At first I did not, but then ... you were there too,
You know, you who have loved beyond grasp and get,
And have fallen on better times.  You know how
The climatologists saved us.  You know
The Mall is only a joke, a long series of such,
A Pompæn joke that only erupts in a future
That you and I, as children, have escaped.
After, you know, we went to the sea, and wept.
Then we returned to the Hospital of Social ReEducation.
The bloodhounds had sniffed us down.
And now you recall: The bilkdung in the abandoned
Lobe of the Sati, the mined fire escrapes, 
The chemfood, and the colorskull Mayavision,
Our constant outbreaks and recaptures.  And you 
Remember how we laughed through tears
At ole Nurse Matchet's kindly sulfur and incendeous
Intent, her skin the color of askus mixed with bile,
A dumpy women, dully flatulent. 
And you remember the flood, and the opera's ruin,
And the three-headed hogs, and of course,
The infamous floodhound.  You know, yes? the Floodhound!
I know we never mentioned him before,
But you knew too, you smelt him following,
The Floodhound of Heaven, some called hum, when he swum
Like a dolphin, humping his black brokeback above the whater,
And even when he returned us to the ward, we still
Said, god doog, god doog.  Wait.  Just have the barmaid
Flip the channel, everything may yet flow out alt right,
You'll see, those mene selves, even if barely floating
Under the reified scream, can never strep through
The glass starkly, nor never rip your throat,
And leave it smiling.  Listen.  I can make the slit talk.
And here's what IT wants to say:  Dunce, upon what time
Did you rise, the bladder of your stomach distended
By the plasticized indiejestable of the potion 
You mixed at midnight to satiate your terror
Of not having?  Of knot having what?  Listen.  
In order for the mawjink to become operational
We need to concoct the conglomeration
Of the cardinal asssences to form the complex
Of the evil nimbuses.  It has been dog years
Since you rounded up the manimal materials
Required for the ingredients of your craftiness,
Thunder and wind in the bottled up intestines
Eruct at the acid end, and the tongue, in the midst
Of teeth that fall like fame, acidcynically
Belch irony as its only legitimate nighttime prayer.
You stumble through the house in the predawn
Dark, the once familiar furniture made strange
By plutonic gloryholes of purple circles.
Thus the hermaphroditic complex, in one glob
Here and gone, ignites the potencies of the enemy elements,
And their coital congress unites in a twisted usurper:
The min whose soul becomes the dust of money,
The timetide of pulverized nightmares floating his heirs.
The balance that nature prescribes as her quintessence
Is anatomized with demonic grappling scalpels,
The entrails read for market prophesies.
Yes, IT is dishonest, but that was the essential
Thing about the Maulmen, that they were
Pitriarchal to the nth debris, and made their
Junk food recipes from the infant female
In her knotted failopæm tubes.  They were at bottom
Chemical maniacs, ovacular reactionaries,
Crowned with placental cauls of authority,
And wagging prehensile tales.  But out
Of the pubic heye, they hurt themselves,
The voxes in their left heres now telling them:
I am doomed to live with envy all my daze,
The unwanted emotion of my duple terror:
The fear of being ignored and of being poor.
I had come to regret developing history,
Instead of heart.  And my disease was spreading.
Soon I would be that Mounduemint of Shame:
Stasis.  Yes, yes, I would strumpet IT at all 
The Ends of the hErth.  STASIS in capital litters.
STASIS, the slick orange farrow of my dead sow,
Grunting my trinityheeded ghostspells.
STASIS, the tipping point between my own
Esteem and that of the rapist's autistic 
Embryo.  What?  Ah, but I cannot answer,
For the voice of the turbulent ocean
Of my lair has interveined with ecolocation
Clicks.  Did I ever ...  KHEHK! ... did I ever tell you ... TEHK!
About the slickXEHK skin of the dollfin,
Whose epiderm could speed and slow 
Through verbal turmoil at the rate of racyresonance
Through water?  I doted on amphibial 
Mememaries, one nipple in credit, one
In stuck certificants, one fin in fodder,
One wing inhurt, both hands up the slave
Of malicious tyranny.  I had forgotten,
When moving, that all things move.  Loafer/sisturn/mutter,
I've lied to you, and sold your womb
For poisonal gain and power.  I have
Eaten my own potential, and have starved,
My hevile cancelled by my offal I.
A loan, I wail on my baptismal itch,
Mauled in the afterdeath of klepitalhism,
The lite of my genius sold to the highest badder,
A resin of insect spittle preserving my crimes,
Like so many angles spawning on a din.

Canto XXIII
Hear now, Readher, I want you to abandon
The shorelimed of what hIT means, and embrace
The highdea of whordes of unsound entities rioting 
In the brine.  Hell, I'm here, in the seacreted
Whoremoanall notion of infinity, down INN
The deeps of the inexplicable, where the pressures
And the frieze have squeezed the mullacules
Into tiny bioluminated monstars.  You are 
Surpriced?  Continuusly.  But wasn't that always
The skinned-in motion's plane?  To drown us
In perpit-youall misteary?  Are you sure?  Yes,
Of curse I AM, for surely, Hell hath no greetear
Blurry than a woemoaned torn.  Tears tell us:
We are all the motion of an ocean — nothing blessed.
Therefroth, Readhim, I want you to float among
All these allfed bits as if their solute were the providence
Of a disguised omniscience.  Whyne?  Because, IT tells Who
IT is impossible to read further without reading deeper.
But beware those eddies of familhiliarity which too mush
Re-simple Stasis.  Questtin:  Is the search for the gold
Seam of the Reel's intentions to end in the crystyllization
Of a surprised expression? a satisflayed face that never changes,
Immortalized in its decay-resisting-resins, so that
No difference can be befuddled between floury myth
And confected fact, and the cake, leadened
With such hypocrisy is the mineralized last supper
Of cannibal preterites breaking the last of their teeth
On pyrites that only look like gold's most malleable
Sugars, but are as toxic to the tongue's touch
As any liar's paysion for sum ruth must surely be.
Are you sure?  Look around — you can't look in —
Without delving into the hidden read ocean
Which elevates the pressures and depths
With its dark chemical crimorisons.  You can't mole
A hole in the ocean of who you are
To restore what you have been.  You can't touch
The plasticized skin with any scalpel or needle
Without introducing a toxic metal allgo-arrhythmia
That poisons everything with the speed of exsanguiNation.
In spit of the viral ghossip of paytrebots.
This story is too heavy for any maulman rigged
To exploit the system for his own golddamn commode.
It is the refugee mother's story, the once upon
This heavy crime, where a young woman made old
By your infliction of penyourocity walks across 
Hurths that open beneath her feats, to reveal
The Hell of your Op-posings.  She has a toddler in tow,
And a fetal threat that festers in her womb, and she
Is drowning the Real of the mirrorly Hummaned with a movement
Defiant of your Stasis, defiant of your suffocating
Accumulations and your virtually stoleloaned
Accoumtpostments, defiant of everything
Your cynicism has hardened with her fierce
Acidic flow of tears.  These see-levels are rising,
And they are rising with a karmic automaticity
That cannot be twittered away by virtual bleeps.
The sparrows are falling in unnumbered multitudes,
And their fluttered featherings are the subtle cilia
Which propel these deurbanized waves of the dispossessed.
The divine decree has been, like compound disinterest, 
Propounded into bibblackly epic proportions,
And your gilt has been affixed to that warpedwharf 
To be drowned in an exile's deserted sorrow,
Your ghost filling the blank skies with its lonely jackel barks.
OH, MAGA, you are right to fear, for a Tsunami 
Of cholestralized gloop has razed its fist 
In your blood, and is brusting the ventrickles 
Closed — so that your hard bleats too fist.  Any moment now
You may begin to feel, and what you feel
Will be this mother's feeling, an exile on the move
With two beating hearts, and a third pulse in the outer,
Holding her boney hand: the Mother, the crumb,
And the Holy germ writhing with haggard steps
Her damning scriptures, her triune ruth
Come to floust the trinity's ruthless.  Oh, brokers,
Let us pry!  Dear Cuntsomore, Allay Express
Presents scale model figurines of refugee mothers 
With children.  Choose from a variety of ethnicities
And stages of destitution, including nudity,
Pregnancy, and starvation.  These unspoked models
Are molded with exquisite detail from polyreasons,
And some postpostal assembly is required 
Of peopleplaint and other codings.
Noht: the resin may become bent or warped
During shipping, but can be reified by drowning
IT In hot whater for a few murdents crime.
We ship preemptively and modulls make
A perfect subtrician for Dear Old Dead's fireplace mental.
Imagine how good it will lark
Below that taxidermied head of extinctualized
Fauna he debagged on hissed lost exotica 
Erotica.  He got hist gunt and she got it —
Second amadment style.
The perfect gift for Farter's Day.  Odor now,
And we will include livestreamstink
Of ritualized howling from Gypanese Maskers
Trained in patrynome proforma practices
Handed down and down for many mandacious sendjuries.
Sale ends neversoon, some restrictions rapeply. 
But how sad, how very sad, to wait for shipment,
To stand in the rivivalost's Evanjawricle's tent,
And singing Jade-us love's me, less I know,
Cuz the Babble tolls me so — andpew just know,  you ab-solutely know,
He don't luff her, oh no, couz she haint
Wound of the elect.  We got it, but she don't
Get IT, so we have gave IT to her.  Allmen.
Listen: Phasespace changes sometimes compleafie
Their disintegrations before their circlings
Ellisp down to screw in another et-tear-ration.
Do.  Knot.  Be.  Anybling but alarmed,
The shine of your enemy's enddeedbrihated knose is showing
To kingdumbed come and all the callused 
Sophisticants are loafing at you.  Flings
Flail apart, the sin-tear can not fold,
More anarchy is loosed upon the Whirled,
The blooddamned tied is loosed, razing
ITs lake from the wound — and — yet — its mask,
Wrinkled like heat from two lovers' breasts,
And circled with circling buzzard shadows,
Still views the view through I holes, two
Red ones, one debit, one credit, flatorbs
Perpitifully skimming glaszy screams,
In search Off what hexactly?  of: Interriptions.
What?  of sum restspit of love or joy, or some species
Thereof, somefling that will help us
Turn the cromutic vulture shades to scales,
From whose matrix we might extricate
A music that might gift us with the presized noeledge
Of how life's interplay of dolors afflick the retina
And strip us of all Gob's colorfailed antruesions.  
The zone of Expansion's breathing space is shrinking,
But there R-noun here these anaerobic realms that deepen.
The somnambuliesed self-illoamminated shines
Tinny tinily from the coldest hex.  You hear ITs
Strumpet toot.  A tune so slow its shallow shape
Is shapeless.  You are two again, heavily crawling,
Side buy slide through muck.  We two at lost are none.
But we are shown the bearded ocean god 
With a buoy-dick and the tit-floats of a woman.  
And We halfed herd refugeed currents circulating,
Slow, slower, in unison genuflecting.  
It is a squeaking sound, like a glass
Keyed harmoanacaw, but more out-spookskinned, like
A dying there-a-man machine.  The music is harsh, true,
Predatory even, IT sniffs around, IT smells YOU. yESS: US.
The musick is like that Floodhound we so feared,
The muselick is like nothing we never tested.  
The music is like a caged child, humming 
A tune to pry two.  I know you hate him,
And writhely so, but he'll be dead in a minute
And bled to desert dust, so why not indulge him
With a last-wish crayon?  Go ahead, poke
His stupid face, but then, give him the cryon,
And see what he draws from his ballooning pain.
Put the drawing on the refringejeerraider,
Wherein cold cry-o- gentrix can hum bellow its scribblings.
Hummm?  What could it be?  Crow droppin's?
Plenty of diarrhea here about.  His mother's
Face in slAshes?  His undifferentshehated name?
No.  New.  Known.  He says IT is a whail,
A bleached one.  And next to the whail
A fly that's come to sniff him.  But Y, you quiz,
Is the fly so hotdamned much begga than the whale?
Are you stupid, boy?  Hey, Luke, restrict this-a-juan's
Whater, he don't know sheet.  Oh, no.  No,
Señsnore, I know, I know!  The fly she is beegore
Becusst she eats the wall.

Canto XXIV
Tell me, Metamorphogogue, is the spineless boody
Of your hysturdy always to be so dishonestly
Serpentine?  Will you continue to insist on an existence
Which wraps around the pillar of a phaze,
Then with a fib as stiff as a javelin, hurls ITs hardsell
From the engine of your malice to pierce the hearts
Of infant exiles?  It is a strange breath you spew,
Its fumes abortifacient to pregnant nomen.  Look
How your lies, like smoke in starefells, waver from snide
To slide, one gross elide of double-headed in-trials,
Plowing the ground with its taleless meanderings
To make mass graves for mothers with brownbeaten sKin.
It is a precious stone, the tongue of the po'IT, which makes
Succor inaudible to the visible, and invisible to the Loud.
Shut up, Helliodroop, how dare you take the Loud's
Fame in vain, what do you know about the pastors
Of the passed where white shorn sheep slept golden
In the spring, and let the blood of their own rascal lambs
Furnish the pascal Sumpday slurmon feast?  For you
IT is ashes, sprinkled like killing frost, to cleanse
The gullet of an un-be-liver, butt for US the killing 
Of smOthers is our strife.  From generation to de-
Generation we have perverted these manly laws
We live by until they nakedly suit us, and who
Are you to say we walk obscene?  I am inn-saint.
What?  I am udderly milked of breath de-
Trouncing your dupeplicity, and all your pre-
CipitUS fails from race.  You swiped the coppers
From Cryst's ICE in his tomb, and gave them
To Highhalfass to piss false judgement,
And where your peeitty leaked iron nails ran in.
Boddamn you as the Son of ConnAll,
You cannot turtle your chinless cudgels 
At me and call them puerile scripcures,
Stealing the gold from the scarcecity,
And blaming it on brothers.  May the Layered
Oflove de-leg you, and make you slither.
For your ignorlance has slashed the cunt of shEden,
And let out streams of blood on desert waste.
You are lewder than a sneak's gut in a roderut.
May the Buzzard above US pick your crux to peaces.
Stop, dear brethern and cistern, why gambit
In these wobbling ambits, when stucks are up,
And there are blings to buy?  Stick to this channel, Sticky,
In your dream, and you wall be hastily endowned
At Zed persaid off, but only if you call NOw with this 
None-timed offher.  Watch.  The spooksMoghul 
Can addict you to all those pseudo pilliations
Which enhance your poll facilities.  Look:
You can make your girled a garden of enchainment,
And she will surely loathe you all yor lays.
Are you sure?  Sure I'm sheared.
Heave your crudeit crud redly,
Hoganators are grunting: Bye.
Listen: when ewes live in NotimeNoplace, I, E,
The huge slumcity without a name, the raum
Will always be thicker than the grey, and the dust
On the lethal lecturn will be clotted with the dull
Of Drearly belovèd sermons.  Your talk will be only
A black cloth for sickening, wraped round the eyes,
Or waddead in the throat.  Like a pale cried
Flower by the desert maiden crushed, 
The golden pageant of the tears will no longer
Gild the sacred hours with the unknown sledger's
Memorial pomp of any further once-upon-a-spines.
The argumound will crater to a sink,
And your love-scarred face will be drowned in its
Dwelt apart.  All the Earth's alltars will be
As slick as assfault, and flatter than the flags
Of defeated notions — no hidden reptiles
To tox your deficiencies, no modest hermit
To rose your sallow.  Oiled Precedent Maga Allfooled —
Your nude cell fold — will commodedefy your empty symbol,
And the protoplasmically wet of your hominid
Will be prost-sated to a techno dump.  Sow what
If you hold the Whorled in your whitewashed blands?
It is a woerld of impoverished non-in-titties,
Milk-mores of defaminized papaganda,
The pap of machineries' consumerhism, 
Nursing its mammally deficient snakes,
Of which you are deplorably butt dumb.
IT is a quotion of fragmented percentages.
Queststunned: What pleadsentage of insight might we expect
Deducted from this total of sigh-co-sees?
Two?  Perhaps.  But not you, not I, for wee, in schizophrenic frenzy,
Swallowed by sickness, redacted to two stumps,
Electroconvulsively therapized to no-things,
Personless people searching for some sylph,
And praying to a pharmaceutical Glob,
We will be haunts of hearsewhiled memories.
No, Know, not hue, not eyes, we shall be colorless
Smears on a lurking gass, the fogs of breath
That fade like fire to rashes, our faces deflated
Like crimeson pricked Hellloons.  Night.
Night.  But weight.  Befloored the lead of sleep
Has coffined all, let us appall ourcells
With bledtime scaries, scar-ies of orphans pathed
On Dad's yell O-slimes, who, in,  through their wishes
For rest — their mother beneath the mulch
Beneath their feet — X-aile the laboring breaths
Of birthing dEarth.  And let us feel in her winding,
Whendiggy breathing the wavering winds of change.  
For her they musk be harsh and pentafienting, and yet
For lungs like ours they tongue so sweetly.
Hers is the cry from the bottom of the lack,
Where she grieves, dishonored and a loon.
And shyet she snumbers the precedent's combover errors,
And turns his ploys to sorrow.  Sad.  So sad.
His skull is severed, and his squirming snakes
Blanch in the crescent flight of the frostfed moon.
Listen:  A mournfull pry crouched on the underwaters
Has rinkkilled his arrogance with her pregnancy.
So that he, and all his retinue, criminally sink
Down to refuses' slunken slag.  And there, down there,
Below, where the destitute move on the looner plaint,
With all the easy motion of her tides, they shovel
Evil tons of lassitude, of helpless outrage,
And of dieapashun, until their fat, their muse ill,
Their brittle bones are all fatigued a-weigh,
And all that remains is her osheannicked marrow,
Mute as a serpent's tongue that sniffs for prey,
Her slylance louder than media exploshowns,
Graphing the plagues of your un-abaited breaths.
And this is what she says: IT is badder, my Loathe,
To contemplate the stars, then to fibricate
A phoney birth certificant, or to finger one's X
On an innocent's death war-rent.  It is better
To revert to initial contritions, where flabbiness
Firms, weak strengthens, and excess
Gaunts.  Sea levels are rising and the whaters
Will give birth, and these will strip
Your skin's impulsive noccasions, and reverse
In an in stint all your retrO seavile.  And you,
My voice of uncivility, will be forced to regain
Your blasted naiveté in the stringent squeeze
Of my walling birth canal, the singale witless
This wrathless fly on the wail.

Canto XXV
Warning: In the muzzle is a puzzle: Wish for it.
Yip, in end, there is an answer: Howl it.
And in between, languid streams lazily,
Softly circle to a lake, like the sound of sMoother sobbing.
It is this sad swound for which we swiftly scissor the ganglions,
And as they sillily convulse, one-in-on-under-one, 
Entinglingly intangled, we say: Say
Time is the chief illusion of mortality, she is that,
Who, for our mistunderstanding, separates Glob's
Endless Simultanieties into seaquences, so that — 
Sow that — we can seize her shape, because — be causeloss —
Her beauty, to be ultimately intimately beautyUS,
Mist be efamereall.  A quick slide down the graveytee
Gradiant, howover, is anathema to wee pour mortails,
And selflesh as we hour, we have found that our
Deadly lassitude might be temporarereally reinvivgoremated
By fighting, thieving, eating, and/whore formacating, so that
We might steal some Time from nothers not like cUSs. 
Do you umberstain?  No?  No matter.  Who could you?
Far in these regions the darkness is so dark it starts
To sparkle.  Then?  Then it starts to undyurelate.  Then?  Then
Semi-saglubrious sinyouus forms start to squiggle.
Then?  Then the philo-sophistry of the Bog ThickIT  
Emerges, and ole TeXt Wridder, drawls froth his elemeants
Unnecesquariley from the millitudes.  Hare foodt in mouth,
Ridiculizing his unpaleusaid pataphysics, our X-proph garbadly
Spews:  Lassin: The orgumlick steals from the inorgonelack
Inapportionhatin' ITS integrity as phood.
Trancelexion?  Don't.  Stop.  reddin' betwixst the lienes.
Evil, as ever school chyle knows, is only live spilled
Slackwards, and then, then the refrain means nothin'.
But, knote how the thang we miscull Death never
Rests on hITs lawroles, but danged if it don't tchUrn,
TwistIn' back, whour-la-bore-HE-Usly makin' hITS home tale
Foold.  Do you hungerstand?  IT's the organic
Now that's munchered, the worm turned qwhyIT
Latearrotly, and, F'you'all will Xcuse my pun,
Quiet lingtwistrickalie as wail.  What?  In the church
Of in-be-tweenin's Xstreams of farwray moanflit whaters ownlie
Ampfibbeands survive.  Lesson.  At night,
Go to the lEdge of the lack when the lornloon croons
To the froghorns, and spawn your hears back to NothInn',
Then note that the cry you would beam is not like you.
Listen.  It's quiet here underbEarth, the predator bird afloat 
In the overling, while we belowbellows revert to our
Old true friends in the vermiculture.  Your death's dined
On by our life, and we, the wee D-demons of devolution,
Dissipation, diversion, debilitation, disintegration
(And the Surdblame of someone we might know),
We, all night long in the all knought lane, we, we busy our
Head and tail duel mouths in the ecstasy of dissolving
Your depravity with the simple suckin' sounds of our ... ?
Guess.  Let us imagine a thorooghly emotionalized life
That actuarily lives on love – the taste of loam — let us
Sway — the union with Earth, with all our pushin'-up agony
Surrendered, the amputated hand of the pick-pocket
De-arranged to slitherin' digits, a life of place
Out a time.  Or is it the mother way around?  
But I digest.  Yit, no mudder, we have derailed
All parallels for broken curlicues, and we giltingly
Take all instances at randumb.  But will our lastness
Lead to us leadin' a nude and bitter strife?
Stop.  Stop wanderin'.   The red wrecked conyon
Has swallard the sun, and we will camp hair
Tonight where the desert makes an oceanic whole.
And the hole will be black, so black, that it actually sparkles.
And we will sit around the campfar singin' wrongs,
So many old dowpokes scrapin' the bottoms of borrows,
Listenin' to Ole Text's sorRoy-Dreamt a dronein' the very vermitribes
Under his one bootsoul, wormin' around in resonance.
Lesson: He yawks: Didya know about the deep
Communal cities underrounds?  No?  Well, we had
Expected as mush.  Y?  Because you have virtually
Absconded from the encylin' podia of woundrous
Occuredance.  But when you begin a sereylust study
Of yor decomposition, you will see that your bone-shapes
Are almost liquifyin', so simple and placid
Are their appetites, that they writhe, wrestlin',
Smoothly knottin' in one another's nots.  Huh? 
Lack prouse that turns to poettry with doublin' back,
The narratives degenerate, and what remains,
Beyond bLight's vision, is zero's lack on black,
The lake at night in the awefluvial silt of its cup,
The verah bitter T of mistteary.
In spite of our beast e-forts, it has run down
To this: This chief illusion of mortuality, anatomized
To wurns.  Are you sue-priced at this strange a-version
Two rings?  Ole Taxt in his refrain has sung you so.  
Multiplexing as he has his entities, and havin',
As he has dee-skrybed in his own literaries, the snakematic
Strictures that faintly addumbbrate their intentional
Sobjects, while simulterreously abjuring 
The real and ideal with their licks of indeterminacy.
What?  Ha!  I knew you must be ediflayed in the marge,
Ere I had dun.  So, to put IT brainly: YOU DON'T KNOW.
Translazeshun: You cain't put the hole of the story
In a nook.  For the ward warrens are not definable,
Except through interpenetration, all other readin'
And wrongin' is mere theivin', the cruel crime
Of feedin' death with life.  The rest is: Silence.
But what an all togather squirmy sighlance it is,
Quiet Peersin', rarely, and hardly the paradiesycle
Teasin' gale of merriment that was preached.
You must go through the complex to be simple,
And sit outside in your suburban onclave,
In a cast iron pitio chair bein' eaten by rust,
And wait, wait for the risin' of the gibbous moon.
If the hands of Glob are to open their giftin'guess,
You have to wait, till the weight of timelymass
Falls through your serpentine gut with zealous
Squeeze.  You are calm.  You are all that you were
And all that you weren't to be.  And you patiently 
Outwait patience to finally be a kind 
Of inquasitorial failure of utterance, your raid
On the bland articulate complete, and all the tegumeant
Bridges of the body, burned to in humus trash.
Still: You wait.  You wait.  The cryotes on the marshes
Start to yelp.  Yoooou waaayt.  Waaayt.  The rats
In the gutters sniff: Squicker, Squicker. and the bats
In their lanternlost lair titter twitterin' sqreaks.  You
Wait.  Wait.  Wait as the possum fakes.
And you forget.  You brailley forget why you
Are waitin'.  And you wait.  The piles of your smells
Are macerated, and their vaporous herpitical S's 
Slip through air.  And you wait.  Wait.  Weight.
Because waitin' has become the one word you 
Have sot, the andswear to the demon's suckin' 
Qwistshown, when the worm of the tongue,
Aware of the Deep's negations, utters
Sly-elosquishly, with subtle sprays of saliva:
The thing you did not find in the puddle's muddle,
Though you squeezed ever' wurd from the guts
Of the whole concordance, and nothin'  E-merged
But the foul gas of: DEfiance.    

Canto XXVI
Deflyance, that's the buzz from the maggot mothers,
Irre-decently seeking only a warm oviposition site
For their larval nureslurries, these mullittudes
Gathered by the see's dead sures to be fed
The loathes and wishes of a miracle.
It is time, this nick between ticks, for the place
Of narrative to be replaced by metafears,
IT is time for feeling to feel its way through thinking,
To ravel the unravelled philosofoodly of need,
And make a child's gametion an oldster's gumption.
Roll up your sleeps and blend offher: the form is forming.
And what is IT?  Watch.  Listen, the entrails 
Of the sacrifice are wroughton to be red.  Read them.
What?  IT is the theme and variations jig- 
Jagged for the buzzrddheaded philosopoor 
Who is distracted in his wrinkled wad of waddles in 
The areguimound.  But these shes are not those hes.
These shes have red ringed round their target eyes, 
And they shake everywhere with what
They call intearshunall tremores, and from 
That read riot of their mnonnysense cackles 
Come the same sold magàd old quessshun:  
Why did the polecat climb out of her knockturnknelled  
Warren and try to christ-cross the rode?
A question of origins, surely, and off destininnies,
Something mute and moot, because — fear she is,
Squished in late pregnancies' muciledge,
Her kits in the vox unassemblamable, because she
Never made IT! ... HIT has ended her, so this roughUsee,
Nomadding, finally bleeds: Arrived.  No where.  Here.
Our roadgel seams surrounded by these sex Earth mothers. 
And they, in ritual communion, gently, peace by peace, 
Are taking her back, their sharp beaks protruding 
From their black burkas, these crones' diseases
Searching the guts of this odor and notspring
To consume the inedible foodts of the God dissed.
These Fortunas all have the same beautiful face,
Hidden in Lady Vaulttura's waddled mask, the friendly
Welgoning committedtee praying in tearing sounds,
And in the hiss and rasp of heavily feathered sighs
And scuffles.  These sex, scrapping a little over the savory
Scrapes, wing pinions heaving for light flight,
Are yet festbound to the assfaulted pavemeant — the takers away,
Who have soared and searched and waited for 
This murder, this end to the quistshamed 
Of dustinies and origlums, their last suffer, iconic
Of mygravetions, scarcely to be cattlelogued as life
Worthy of life, this death unmourned, unmoored, 
A striped tale of black and white, whose nightmare
Movements were motivated purely by Missed Teary,
Her smashed flesh soon to be taken aloft 
In the guts of these scabrevengeancers,
The stench of the collision and ITs dispersion
Strung out along the lieway for riles.  You laugh.  
IT is, you say, a trivial catastrophe, and if we must,
We wonder, silently, in andsewer: Yes, but trivial for whom?
Is this reaction to the phenomenon as honest
As the phenomenon ITSELF?  What in deed
Did prompt this pregnant vexin to move from safe
Risking under dirt to the ultimate safe neverrisky
Crush of Fortune's final feasting?  IT must be,
I guess, for the sake of the urge, purged souly by
Seeking, and only interripped by this expulsion
Of order from escaping body odors.  Why did
The poIT christ the ode?  Whail, surely it was
Not to get to the other snide.  Are you sure?
Shear I'm shorn.  Lesson: Let me tall you a sobtail
Sturry, squeezed from these tears and blood,
As from an outcursed mother's miseried mammeries, 
To feed her messkits in the afterwhirled.  IT is
A pomb of sorts, if you would cull IT that,
A music of squirts where the odors of breath
And death copulate fiercely in the stormy throat
To spiral a whirlwind in the famished ear — 
AH, OH, and the tines of the comb catch nits,
The phlebophages that parasight on what 
They suck of meaning from your flash.
If you pinch 'em with your tunnail, they will gush,
Not plots of puzzles, but dictionaviaries 
Of concordance-rookeries, syllables of the sea-
Rush, washed by the flood of the limbs ...
But I fly West ... My story is about a failure,
A going forth, but a failure to come back,
An adventure to gnos the ungnosable,
A sticking of the nose into everybodies' business,
As the philosopher posesit whines to find 
One more port in the forte of the form,
And to sail his snip beyond all known sleights
To disproble all unknown depths, as if ... as if ... But 
You, who are complied to glisten, allruddy 
Know that Hell is a plague of discontinuous
Parallel running routines, each of which
Make life or death demands from such 
Trivial concerns that its denizens grow 
Paunchy and punchy alternately eating
And absorbing its indiejestable dieseedcess.
So let the record show that I have no 
Poestsitshun of authoridiocy to make you
Believe the power of this text.  You
Have come this far.  So you are already
Noht fooled.  You know the ritual 
Of the punway and the pantominds
Of possible expression that can be expursed 
In here, even before the masked performer
Can reach the commurinal proscenium.
You all readly know that this theater is only
For Pervercity Imaginators, the merely Prosacic
Need not apply, because they cannot see 
Through the cussttombs to the discipline 
Of the actjeers, and so they assume 
That their actions are unreeled.  So.  Too.  You all rheady 
Know that HERE changes scenes immate-ately
From orient to accidon't, but the work is arranged
So splainlessly that there is NOH DEAD TIME.
No thing but bliss, and the unwise radioscopes
That would council us to try to buy it.  You are
Here.  So you are already an Already, a With
In the masskes of mere Alsos.  Yours is of 
Coarse, a chield's theatear, parroiding Pounds
Of flesh before this chimeerus skunk-spirit,
Void of humane smells, squirtsing its bling-blight
As murrorriodds of phoney perSony pokineze
Into every bleedin'bone, in ordor to sleight their marrows.
Let me introloose you to Ab Brupt Trance Slitshowns,
A.K.A. Note's Transitions.  The channels of these sea
Qwhences switchswish undderbuck contemptuously,
According to the frequencies' dictations.  Would you
Be curious to know how you came about?  Lend but One 
NanoSeacount of your precious time.  The secret is in that
Here.  The jimmying flatline of the guilting's horizon
Is puresuaded — falsely — to lump as the crookèd
Ascent of the foodthells, which in wormturned,
Whether arrogantly or with deswerved merHIT,
Rise fatfully to the old volcanic conical
Of one's tootaleery Moantamned.  HIT
Is a force outsite, ruling the deflated 
With the duel bytes of noone and mid-
Sight.  Yet, as you well know, the city, where
The trolls strike metal with medulla, lies beflow,
ITs deserted denizens each programmed alwrongly
Into their warring prevarities, E. gee., : These are those
Unable to expect our un-expectorated innocence,
Which is to bray: The Sleepers.  After the vulture
Klipitalist's last soppers come Elfflowllutions' VULVCURVES ...
Those sixcks sex crones premeously named.  When you were
In unreel sleep, in the weasally womb of your dearly
Beclovid sMother, then you smelled that smell.  You would 
Not have believed it if you had not bewreathed it:
Yorsellf.  Forgotten before begotten. 
Your heart flails you.  Y?  Because after,
The workkin arrive to put up the blinds, and it 
Is meat that they should do so, you being 
The infant strength of competence in an erra
Of flaccidity — while here I AM being perswaydead
That I am running sloughly, while slowly, slowly
Ruining flout of hours.   And to think, even here,
In Heil, how the ascendant sun, straight Overlife,
Has shrunk the shadows and drivIn them hungersound,
Where the vermin thrive, asleep in brood faylight,
The spirits of the night, not in the radioscoupe,
But in actuairial animalls.  Now.  Here: 
Warning-pelted with stripes of lack and blight, 
These pregnant sow emerjauntpleas
Will venture the roads in darkness, 
And be tripped-in by headlights.  Stoop.  Wait.
Surprise!  Death is more sudden than flatlife
And assumes a mindtellic speed
Not prepared for by the genetic fiddlings
Of evolution to turn the tumblings 
Of chance to the openzing of a comb
Versesation.  High talk, please.  Something urbane — abbeetunenoir — 
And as subtle as a fly's spec 
Hummmped in the joke of an egg.


Canto XXVII
Iz there a buzz in your fearz?  Iz Sarcophaga Kleptoparasiticult
Making a maggoting mess of your blamepan,
And charishing your sodschitt above all Hellse?
Iz I. M. — the Dad of Baby Jeezus — wholly ghosting
Through your vocluebyoulurky to humm hiz evanjeericles
Right through the holed Notion's thee-egotestical hizzstory?
And iz the cleavill of civile war amputating phlegm from cuss again?
The pestors from their pupaults spew as mush, ass-inserting
That the Babble tells us that the Blowholy tRoller is about to mash  
tHis roled weirld flat with the weight of everysinnersucker's crapses. 
Lezzon: We of the grozz spawn consider
Incubation to be an inside dodge, the whatsa
Smatter of dupleredaubled tricknessess
Whose continuously couplecobbled coagulations
Make a rhyzoanrootbale from replaited revoidances 
To refinedoily clump to a kin of clot that iz.  Get it?
We war the voizes that smoke from the cozmic ire,
Which did swarm to inform your grozz persistruant collusion
That its flash is but the refluctions in facing nearrors, 
The farm for future shatophagic flies, glistening on the wail.
We are the final fleaquences postproseeding
In aftertears from the fetus's first burst interrupture.
Hold IT.  Who told you this secret?  That your body temperature
Of ninny-late, punct sex debris Foreignspite is perfectly calibrated
To incubate the pregnancies of nitrochrondria?
And what are these fetuses if not magimusicianal
Spores, as of those sleights of handy
Expansievely contrapunctalized in your infant mushedroomb?
Now in this depth of uncertainties, finally
We can answer the question: Are you sure?
Yes, I am certain that I doubt that I am because 
These infant aliens cavort in other dimensions
Whenever the body hatches the emergencies of death,
Fever, or sleep, and it is from these nocales
That the angels peer down and through the body's cells.
Certainly, even you can see them now, 
Hallowing the channels to other forms of life, 
Nourishing the denizens of Hell and Heaven alike
With a milky suckle that is most like those needles of light
That turn snaky in moongleam, scratching the screen
Of this reality from the Nother slide, so that
Through words, looncalls, and slother croonings
Of the alonenesscide, the oracle may color the inner
Occulrarities with auricular verities, and even
The poorrisk prophet sees how gamey 
The leavings of dementia or demise just happen 
To be: The lilies in the funeral parlor wrapping
Their sweet odor of overripe decay
Around a pasteboard box of Deady's ashes.  Do they
Not speak with the drunken mumblings 
Of our sober, slaphappy father, whose joybred
Playfulness has now been incinerated,
Leaving only this somber silt of grey?  Death,
As he reminded us: is so very sinstructive.
But weight.  IT may be that such trancefactional
Perversities are the ancient new glimmerings
Of an on the come bet to achieve the trans-rationall
And to finally infuse all this gravitationall
Of messed opacity with the Trance Parent,
Who tells us: Well, First you stole a booty,
And now you want to steel a sole?  There is
No firm in your infirmities, and thus that 
Ardour in your odor will keep heating your flam-
Buoyancy with the restless flame of searching
Without discovery: The inferno of the nomad
Exiled to the agony of a liefe sans mawternal organs:
No slobiditty but images, images, images only.
Thus, the Farther.  Now, Nixt, the Sum: "Dear oh drear
Deaddy, I loved you true, but do you mean to stand
There with your asshface hanging out 
Of your yeller snicker and conjuncture that 
The hole purepass of a dewman berth 
Is to generate auravisual insubstantialities?"
Son, clearly you are ripening to con-fusion.  That is good.  Good.
Death tells me, that ass anthracritically dense as IT is now, 
This bleak grilled crueld has withinknit the dug-gone poetsensual
Passability of dawn.  Not here, in this plastrow,
But there in that comenow, the Now of Knows,
Where the vaporous smells will waft their origins,
And the perfumes of prepetelled seeds, long buried
In the city's rubble, will rumble to pieces, yet peace
Togather E-dawn's lost Guardune.  All will be swell, and all
Clutter of stings will be swelled, and the lyre and the roast
Shall be done.  Do you hear?  "No, Dad.  My anguish
Sucks only silence from your noice.  I cant catch
The trick of your voice, it seems to be dis-
Tortured, and too limptoned to specker my slick hide.
I have become thickly callused against your musesick."
Son, listen, it is souly this sound behind the seen
Whereby you learn Death's art of bodhilessnest.
O Buddhy, I am tilling you the straight dirt: Meditate
Diply on the madness.  That is your last, 
And gravefest respansability.  You must be
Blown to Smitherseams, that capital in the crater
Of the desert where aspirations gathered from life's
Breath escape strife's windiness in final rest.
But remember fiendally in your schleppytime,
That mine is the cancel against false council,
Whose fraudyoulaunch in this cant OH will forheaver
Be perforated with the Cretan lyre's pairadox —
That Museslick of the Smears whose fuzzy denuncemeants
Collect with equal kick both pulses and mindnesses,
An oscillation from whose whappity-whappity
Bling-banging comes the sparks whose nuclear fires
Contain in self-affirming and self-negating emurkshuns
Both con and pro positions, the joke and blight 
Of the one egg on your vapormist phazes.  Get it?
Your face is a birthmask in its frisk and blast rictus. 
You, the first-porn sum or doubter, are but the poorist flightrisk,
Enchased in your dirt bandedge, yet longing to fledge.  Leak:
The harmies of forgetfulness begin to mass, frivolously
Having drunk from the blurried bladder wherepinned
The yeller pisser distends to disorient your joy.  Mystear I. M.
New begs you to substyttude duty for gladness, as at
Her first Word Heat did.  Mystir I. M. begs you to tAughtHism
With your depth of innerdness, the continuum's
Undefined idioms making their points sands definitions.
Do you understrand?  Lit may be years before the subsdance
Correlates to the complexity of the substrainght.
Yet simply put — and Mystar EYE SCAM never lies —
He tells of three stoops to and from the sorecoughaguest,
Or more samply, from doom to womb, which are:
Awarnness.  Exlearyance in Crime.  And ... 
"What?"  Ah, but I hesit hate to say the third, it being 
The meatacompliclaytion from which Atom was maid,
Your inner ansequestor, he who compares preysent
And gassed expluriences and measures them
One to the other with the yawnstick of old General Izasians —
The sumperior Lieder of that afearmoantioned remanglered harmy.
"Lesson, Farther, though I may be but the gross spawn
Of that drunken odorliness, and though you half'd
Forbidden me by diecreed to leave your whorijinall
Diesign intuct, unjimmied, unstrangled, change IT
I must, or else, like you, I shall be a system that makes
Good products but bad joys, and if bad boys, then broke men,
And if broke men, then the murderers of women,
And if the murderers of woemen, then fatal larvae,
And if fetal laurgphfay, then corpse eaters and the flies
That breed them, and if lie swarmers, surerendus scatoforgers,
And if horrendus scrapafringers, then what then?

Canto XXVIII
Then that's how  you know that you are deep in Hell, because
You enclutter there the Newt Langwedge, the many tongued
Jowl breakers' necessitous buzz of compounded viciounds,
Fly-like in its subtle sifting through the dung of the living
And the egg-cheese of the head.  Beconz, as you can see, 
Such is rechoired for grub and grubs, those squirming eating
Edibles munching on multiple sighmulchstaineous repreymeant 
Stations, which the befuddled read as torture, and the UN
Bebaffled read as phun.  So many circles swerving off in the wronged
Diewreckshams, only to find their hinds in front of their Pi-wholes,
Their former squeezing out homelets for their latter, as if sum
Perversed leg-pullit were laying down its own last supper.
Get IT?  IT eggsuckly requires not only saycunted but tearsheerrarey thOughts,
In order to finally get at the seXyoualliezed secret that has been
Eating IT.  Do knot heed, do not listen, those are the prohibitions
Of the big Taboo that IT enfierces on ITs minilicked larvae —
That they must chumpchomp their own loused down before they hatchIT. 
Just look how all of ITS umbailacalls, the omfellows of ITS ornerybore-us, 
Git hit and shit again — which is the fate of the scatophage cannibal kling,
To be the vassale of hITs own wired APPetights, hITs image
Devouring hITs sub's-dunce.  Like a murmore of frayends, the speaker,
Multiplexes the fatal buzz of stillness, making a meal of hitselves
By molting clumpbound interest in a sea of piled corpses'
Upturned fæces — these the many divorced loafers, dying untrue, 
And — retouring their imperfect hellements — spew like acid dew 
Upon a sleeping flower, like so much toxic cloud-gnating 
Hovering listenlessly above hEarth's decaying leaflings.  Sad, 
AH, sOH said.  So as hot as the compost begums, sow dew ITS
Volatiles waft weird scraptures.  Such as?  If one treats every
Particle of every space of possible existences as a feeling
Feeling and a stinking thought, then, as feeling feelings 
And thinging oughts, the passibility of communication
And cooperation exsits from entity to entities.  Magic then
Becomes a kin of longtwistic eloquence which kinks
Speakers and lesseners in nude boundings of poettry, 
And the Gods, when there cum such, foamed by these linkages,
Become the epic squeakers and lessoneers which shape
Eons of timings and poopulate them.  But Lie diegrist. 
Neverynone knows that not a thing in Hell can hear
Over ITS demonic hazing this salient angelic slinging.
What?  Yes, you are something one finds smushed
On the blacktopped surface of a lonely contree rote,
The carcrushed pollcaught picked at by buzzers and buzzards
In the desolate waste of bewhilederness.  Yes, this is the pyou
Of you that is constantly driven over and driven by-
By a swhirled gone mad to propagate one's specie.
Moaney, money, money, money, noney, 
The cleaver commodity, which cuts the guts
Out of all those freelording charldren, and their 
Wretched spawning murthers, who carry their 
'earts in their 'andout 'ungry palms, mooching pity
With their eyes for 'andgouts.  AH me, OH my,
In the twinkling of an I, how things do change,
The hair of our hackles backcombed into fury
By the grotesque sight of all their manyoufractured
Poverty!  They're eating our surplus before it can rot
Into stocks, the awful moldy minions! making our skins
Crawl with lies by the sheared affronteary 
Of their misery.  If you hacked out a billion
Of their tongues, their skreach could not move
To compission the Grate Blogician bLanturn of Our Head,
Blight of the bloodied world, ballooning so high
Above its booty's fat, that its bloated red
Fires every singegulled apprintass who ever
Came to warshit Him.  Say: Blah.  Then cite chapturd
And curse if any dare blastfiend our chosen crumb.  To Hemhaw,
We pray that they die the death of these afterbirth
Invaders with their larval braybies and their carpful
Woemandibles, all their hordes of lowcusts
Swarming over our fallow fellds of brains,
And bepurpling our moundson's midgetsies.  Stop.
You just don't seem to be getting it the way
They got it, forleaver saying them for then.
Then, lastening doglike for your Presidon't Droolbit
To bore you with his dietales.  Then, you go all bass-
Slackwards with your Babblicull spoutings sprouting
Like blood from a vacated neckhole, your
KongrEgoretional Kurs returning to that vomit
With a proverbbehell Konswervatism just as reguliar
As any coward's chickdin cluckwork.  The scenescarios
Shift, and? drunk or somber, that's jest the swift fling 
You'll juiced half'd to get loose to.  Stop.  Drop.
And laughed me till you rat now, your sheist
Is just not groinawe plook.  Golden skunkmode or no,
Your Great Wide Dope is bound to gas you too.
We are the Dirt's, not She ours, and if the Am-air-zone's
Hair is burning, Her smoke chokes all our lungs,
Read ones or bLack ones, as the Caucasian demands.
Then Youtube will go Xstinkt, and all your screams
Will blank.  Look hear, all you horrible deafplorables,
With all those scripurill scabs in your holey fears,
And all these pisstoral sermons blanding your ICE,
Your Mother is talking now.  I thrust you get my punct.
Yes, I think I am about to feel that memehory now,
It smells Iike a fear mustache sweat-beading 
Athwart my upper unstifflip.  But Mother, not all of it was
Day rat-squeaking and crow-cawing its way to Night.
No, some of it was quite nice, I knew the scarlet secret
Of the color squeezing its droplets out of your blackground pain,
And the joys of water were not alien to me.
I must admit, I had forgotten my prenatal biophonic 
Assignment to record, in my own ears, the animals'
Nocturnal oratorios.  How very agreeable that Iz was.
But the monster under the bed kept growing,
Being my future Kagèd self, and I Kould see that for him,
The child's fear was very amusing, that Kid's terror
Being his chief form of re-creedhateshun, recurring all ways
As the Night Mare ocean sloshing about in the uterine
Brain, like so many liquified fleemale imparsonators,
The real crones having left these changelings
While they winged off vulturely through the shadows 
Of their own dark hungers — their heads as red as the sunset's
Currents snaking across the West's last dead-forged river.
But Lessonsneer, I beg you to consider coming back 
To the maimed sobject, and plead that you contemplate how
Certain unthinking automobilaws have crushed
The curious child into waking roadkill, stuck to
The pave of progress, as if to be so accommodating
As to allow the manyminion minutes their passage
Over eternity, dividing their beauty into clotted guts
And Heir.  I am up here in the bed again, fodder
For the Father below me, whose many internal conflacts
Keep breaking the legs of the bet, and dropping me 
Down.  Ah, Mother, save me, I am spitted apart,
And my own tongue cuts swiftly to the quickened flow.
I bleed.  Oh, Mother, leave me, I tire from doing your bidding.
After every fire in the asylum, you always require
Me to do the sane think, over and offher apain.  "Go out
There on the hallowed gorounds," you tell me, 
"And ash just how many crazing crazies 
You burnt before I birthed them.  Go out there, son, and count the loonantics 
You messed."  But how could I do such a thing?
They send their cries through the night like scalpel sounds,
Which amputate my coiling urbanized tales, 
Leaving me stumped with wings to ply your whileds.
And ... they are masked.  Oh Mother, every one,
Cluck-faced with waddled eons of evolution
Devolving into nervous rowdent models.  Ah, Mother,
If they have subroutined and gone, let them go
Sinking to my bottomnest fright, and let my dicey words
Chance change through all their clouding heaven scents,
Then, let them, let them waft their own weird whys.

Canto XXIX
Weird whys?  Probably you want to know whose ways
These ape, which so hairass each radar of Befuddlese.  I am
The yused you never claim to be.  I am the ones who lie,
And reading, sleep.  I pick the scabs of litters one by none,
To see what the leprous word below must be — a howl
From the local cyyokels, a squeak from the antic rats,
A stench that skunks the air with fluttering bats.
I am the vermin forgotten in the outblack, who weave
Their myths with nits which lice disease.  I. M. a kind
Of snit that snips flesh thReds, and when I sneak, I unrival
The raveled quilt of your false come-forts.  Who I am 
Iz home you soon well be, sunk in a ditch of lost, 
Without a body, the imperishable mystery stuff
Of emotive addictshams, a dematterialized per
Sendage of all most nothing.  That is to clay, a scent
Without a sunstance, the dark of moonlessness
On restless whaters, reflection's vital interpenetration
Of what your lungs ejected, your tongue attempted.
I am entanglement's knot of multi-verses, the none
Who knose, the never breathing stench, the promise
Of your future from my passed ... Oh, helllowed,
Deady, you've bin gone so long, I hardly new you.
You don't look so good, bobbing there in the in
Sumniac's restless stream, like the essence of Time's
Disease.  Butt to tall the truth, I don't feel so G. D.
Glad dither.  I've had a plague of a crime in my
Costpiddle bet heaped down here with the deaf,
Like a worm in a bag of worms made out of worms.
Image Mawrawder — that's what I used to call you —
When I could see to read your initialed headstoned.
I sniff now that you due not mush matter, which is why
You matter much.  And though I plog my heres as beast as eyeclump,
I still hear your stilled load voice croaking to me, as soon
As I stoop to knotthing.  Daddy, I must till you, 
Way down in your dirt, Cant you sea me?  Can't you fell
I am surffering?  My emotions' motions come in pulses,
Spyralls, and weave even inside that stone, which is your seed.
Even as gone as you are, your initials still initialate,
Giving a past to my now by play of a name.  I. M. lot
Ashamed to admit I am till afraud of you.  Though your
Hand cannot torch the odor of my orders, I still am subject
To your visitacations, whitch itch forover where I 
Killnot scratch, and keep me scabfully a wake at not.
Ah, how you too keep arguemening!  Just you weight.
Hit well be a heave on day when maw comes to scald.
Couz when strife and mutter call, you dim well bitter
Less on, or off you will begone from that fine fourth, 
And all yor duplicity and trinicity will be zerode.
In the varied Blinkwinking oven cry, you wall be changed.
Your phat glooss kooked, your swamsong slung.
Your yous will befun arerelevent, and your tongue
Will only sneak as sighlance.  Cut, sliced, probed, bled,
And all for the sake of a boan.  All these piles of ganglieons
Worming about your feats, they are the parts of bodies
Not foully commingled with this inter-prism:  They are 
Those who looked at the stars, the dim stars smeared
By the blightsweats of the city.  Yes, they saw the actual
Scars, the light-scratched film of the ack! chew aereal face,
The very trace of the Gladness, and yet they were not freed.
Uncounted dusky bleats leap dunlow styles. Then?  Then mourning comes,
Unheeded, inharmonized craw crows clawing: Wake, Fakes!  But
Few do so, still muffled in apacknocryptic fightmares — the people
Of the Book of Night sinking in rising seize of their own exstinkshun.
Stop. Take that phone out of your noes, subblurbanned child,
With your breathless cannibal deviated septum, a savage
Psiclonic Mother is coming to drone you, her one rule being:
Get weirder not wireder.  And as your blobby ages, grow shameinastic
Gills and lighttime I's, constrict your bloggy in these subsea priestsures,
And with autistic vision view my deapths.  Befold! my cold
Victimites, assemble your cells, Hypgnoose the Mucknefirerant 
Well new preform for your gluing measures, my positweezely 
Lost perfearmonts anywere of my none-act-one-woemanylogue 
Entotaled: The Purpose of Purposelessness, or The Art of Laying Glow.
Here, the housedarks dim, and a slow lamenting dirge creeps
In our hurts, "the drumbpulse of the beaten", as the entertrainment
Crytic of the Times has wridden.  NotOnce is sane on the presceneium.
And yet She speaks, singslongingly rocking in-sees of her own deep grief.
Hers is a choppy hairia, aping the beast tradishuns of tragedy,
Her retcheatahveetay alchemistically allclusive, her high swounds
Blurred in opererratic screens, but we can see she too is suffering,
Our own poor hearts in the audience exemplifleeing 
The gliberational afflecks of a D. centered Deanammo
Wobbling saidly to rust.  Stopped.  Can't you see IT is lappening
Again, R's memeworries are detouching, floating loose
Of her mummeries, so that we mere specktraitors
Weep in faux parodies of unweened infant needs,
Our tiers the opaque pellets of rat scat, fooling the theatore
With disease.  We can't see our blands in front of our phazes,
And the chiromantic lines of our palmregistry are running
Everywitchaway, our fates unheavenly dyscemetaries
Bemoaning the kyralities of their mismatch.  If she is
Harmony, we are the dis of that.  We don't con fright from cleft.
Clearly there is a clouding in our merewhore.  Like us, she's there,
Not where, yet, we can see our linemeants in hers ...
But lies dieless.  Still from the stage we hear, or think we herd:
"The hextra large vagina of the Brainmah cow is an affective
Organ for heat dissipation."  Orsumdinlikdhat.  I guess.
Can't you sea its braining and raining, just like your murder's
Old wive's tale has tolled IT: Like a row pleaing on a flat rook.
How homey, Homey, yet the dirge from the pit up chucks.
Black musesick, Mystrode, please.  Now twang your magic twanger,
Foggy, our cinderfellas have grown am fibbyall, and crowds
Of lUSts are croaking in the heat, drowned in the flooods of our ates.
Oh Pustules of the Crook, can't you feel how temptation's interventions
Are fattening you with diealphbetic sores?  Remember how that arttwist,
Wrapped in felt, slept with the wild coyote's hacked-off tales ... ?
The breaking of your technological codes requires tricky energies,
And if you fail, your body is reglossed by glass prostheses —
Frangible, frangwobble, shattered, gullible, gone.
Keep on as you have gone, and you will be the ghostly agony
Of the compleated amputee, so involutionally absent from your loves
That you are present only when you loathe.  Stupes!  Iz
That what you tuckus for?  We came here to be amused, butt
No we sea that this is some kind of a texst.  HIT is as if
You are trying to get us to Xhumine our blackgrounds.  But
How can that get us anywere but nowar?  This is not a play,
Or a moonalogue or whatheaver you mean too cull IT,
It's cruel to undermind our crudity.  You are defearing our
Attendshams from grosscities to subtle-ties, spiderly
Mummying us with gossipmirrors, cocrooning lus with your
Last respuners' sighruns, which none can leer and breed.
Yes, yes, you haven't got it, but you could get it,
If you could here and breathe.  That is the test.
To snuggle in an audience of snickers as if to be con
Fused were finally funny — that is to slay, peculiar,
Non-loco, uncleaverly quantombed, and yet, alsow
Fundily, no baddy's fuel.  Is it now you unreallies 
That womblike stricture inslide your head?  She
Iz no mar actstress on a stage, but one who refugees
Nomadly across the knewrolllogical crambscrape
Of your divided strain.  Your own defetus is groawning there,
As innocent as ignorerent evil, a cansirsore
Of action without reflection, retarding alwhys
Through bewhileddirtspent.  It is easy to be con
Foolsed in the face of comepleXcity.  Therefore,
Do nothing, drift, drift, rift like a factus
Floating in morther's swoon.  Ah, it is read in here,
As though a little slight defused through sheathes
Of flesh, and you hear two pulses, resonant as drun,
Soft bonggoing simple sillybulls: Love as long as you can.
What?  Give as much as you could.  Huh?  And do knot ...
Forget.  Pardon?  To strive for union is to strife, is to
Soddenly see a child about to tumble down through a jumble
Of seething whaters.  There is no sought, just lacktion,
The autoreskewer's reflex, not for the mother's favor,
Not for the naybores' praise, and not from sphear
That inaction will bring condemNation.  You act
Because you know WhoEveris can — through kno intervention —
Clear murky waters.  And WhoMay can — from violent hurripains —
Restar the trancequelled forRest.  And WhoDoes clan — in the infant instant — 
Calm babelungs hangry cries to achieve in Weirdnest,
Without any milky whey, ITs own cosmetrical reposed.

Canto XXX
Curtainly, it's tight — her flooding sirvexed — but perhopes you are
Catching a glimpse of that flight at the end of the funall.
Bewar!  Danger approaching, foghorning like the hell
Of fleedom, the plunging ship of fate about to be rooked.
In the pit of nil, your bare mund was dumbly hyperknoting
In his whilderlast of stares, nowere to be tocked. 
But now there come ticking rumors out of the shutduring
Dark that this curssaid lazier is about to be born, the rejectee
Of a refugee crammed in the offling of a catastrofee, 
And should this come to pass, the sati's windowcrematingfears
Will burn the farests down to ashes, and those ash cities, orphaned,
Will recurgitate their inmates, betrayed by their own vain bilkers
To the borebarian Veins.  These vines infiltrate the ruins
And granulate semeantglass to gas, opening the avenues
To the ceaseless victory plurraids of vermin.  All this is happening
Rat now, fright in back of our noses, the 'ole factorey
Cystemmed collapsing under its own weight of brash.
All the mire-re-add mallions of Paunchies and Punchies
Are flayed of their comic blames, skinned down to the bore moans — 
Respooktively, of Justass Bludgebent and HexaCueshamer Retrypukesions,
The polllooted scair itself, gaseously guessing 
So many cartoon speech babbles, each popping with fetal
Xplosions of smitherscream litters, hordes of sharppunned shards
All barbed with the toxsin: You are to blame!
Noh News here, though the postformers claustomb themselves
In stylized scabs so stiff as to inhibit their trovements, their long dumbway, 
Felling to the rightwing of the decentrialliezed staged is
Arguemented with an infinite stunnedway postmortemly
Rising to the cleft.  The actors have masked their spells with
Clergiguilt expressions purporting to be the apostalelastic 
Suckcessors of miracleshirkers.  But when skinned of such,
By the repeated irrigations of their childrapees unmanicured nails,
These pasturds' sirmoans — from the Drearly Beloathèd
School of Prospoority Manistry — revile an under-dermass 
Two facedly devolved into a contorefit specie of troglyninny — 
Their false flensed value not wroth two bytes in actual coin of the realm.
And yet, we all know, all accidents accrue a tension,
We humanits are as drone to them as phlies to think.  Just drip
Blood in our creyes and we woe listen to them to our heart's cement,
Nothing so musick-clabblurred to our leears as the milk of ogresshun's
Inhummad kinness.  Such sanguine quibbling is gall-bled honey
To our lacky fears, reproach, reprove, revenge being the three R's
Of our ABC's, old obstinate overbearingness ever yawning, yowling: You
Are to blame.  Sow, Discord's desultory diligence, endlistly eager
And energetic, assiduously accumulates assinineties
As if they were niceties' nectars, not dismal defects deliriously
Overwhelming us with outbreaks of ordure.  Unprovoked
Ungraciousness unremittingly galvanizes grevious guilt
In horrors of heated hubhub that totally taint: You as the blamer,
You as the blamee, and You as the witless — makes three memememes.
Read it and weep.  But cry as you mite, your name will
Be riddled in the Book of the Dimmed whenever you conflate
Pryde's crimesound inflations with anything but the brief babble
Of dumbsense that they were.  Who rarely, other than you,
Could be to blame?  BOD.  Good.  Good.   Some gesture of genuineness 
At last.  The devil's lost beast terror: That even badness, blind as batd is,
Can still-snailly grate a sneering slowl to blasstedness.  The unruth is:
You wear the moonmadin's mantle of fathers and are constantly
Fishing the flood of synesthesias for some song of slightfeeling
To perfume your own sluff's bittertast.  If you find mum's feather
In the weirds, you must leaf be IT, or hellse she will dissolve in a flurrarely
Haze of violet pitals and storms, her heavenly plumage fledged,
Her starry life lost in layers of myst: another sad verse shunned 
Of the math of steeling ire.  Site familiar?  Good.  Good.  This iz  
You, preening befoul your merehorror, beboasting to your stolen tired and furthers: 
I am nakedly ashamed.  Bat that's knot going to hopen, his IT?
Though Xhorted confanduously to Pull Down Thy Veinity,
You have very hell learned the folly of retorning your ghost's mental,
All ways out for a plenty, in for a Pound, but still as illlit Irate 
As any foruined flesherman drone-ing in a weltering of Nipponice pictogrims.   
For you the fire is identity, and your de-ceasing mother can
Go hang the loon, for all you give a dam, while you wear her bloomhers 
With patronymic pryed.  You raise your biddydiddy handies, and bulldly cry:
Trodition, at all crusts, must be pre-served!  Blut, no murder.  Becuss Faryoneknows 
You're all trumppooie and no dance.  And Furtheewillnotes: Only thieves, with two
Right creeps, can dance the trance of the feignbowed garment, 
And only Nurture Gladnesses  can be endowed with prism garb. 
Bad, so bat, that you think you are thinging when you are only vampyring, 
Bad that you blink that your loatherguilt wrings must be ingroanly invertly infoolded
As you dangle your dingus obskewerly in baffled darkness.  Boo!  Who?
You.  That's who.   You who think hurt's womby cave of contemplation 
Iz only a blacksleeping paleoloss, blinked of dreams.  Confusion is your métier,
Which you perfect by havoiding complication, urineing every
Thing you piss, to doggedly mark the boundrearies of your Notion.
Curtainly, it is tight, this cryfest at the boredours, but unless you
Want to be still born, you must pulserate, you must squeeze drown
To bulge out beggar, dripping with bloody irony's afterbirth.
For heavy's sake, allow your snakes to be reborened.  Doink you reallieze
That your fraud-a-mees e-potions are your home e-motions?  Listen:
You could thrurutly explorience your angerfear through heartistic
Easethetics, and even re-fined them.  You could e-fun make them beautifilled, 
And therebye alllevitate both your scaffoldings.  Why stay stale hung
In your own noosey loopey?  Why keep wringing round 
Your own cosey ash hole, bestinking that bleaching your heinous
Would somehow unslave you?  These staysieze will be the deapth of you,
Onless you juiced leaks your rocked e-notions liquifly.  It's so
Qeasey, you don't even have to squeeze.  IT is all hoopening
Autospyrally.  Are you sure?  Noh, you can nerver be quiet
Sheared.   Butt if you ... Stoop ... you might just feel the spaces
Betwist these lurèds contrickding and exspongecling, like some-
Liar, nigher the bottime of the fundament, drift feeding on dead
Daddy's detritus.  Down dare, Missedstare NoDare is nerver
Murdering his honed chilldlets or laying trips to slay his own strewed splouse,
And no hoarse liar has betroyed the Ciddhi's sprawls
To roaring hydrothralls, or fooul dizzseizes, or per'shing firsts.
What?  Roamer, eye can till you right now, your metaspoors 
Are all over the map.  Yes, Hellfire, and all under it too,
And likewise through and through, and all around, 
Because allwhys the hexile must roam through all lokos,
Like a god in rags to screach a hatefoul screed.
To say that that kind of for-raging is naught medically pre
Farable is to reject the ragpictor who habituates
The memory dump, is to make the comically fright
Full asshurtsham that home is a garb-aged heap of deceits ... 
Unlusts — your very namesnake — is nottèd in the warp of his woof,
A bat shape in coyote's clothing, scavenging through discareds.
Are you sure?  Sure I'm shamed, loathe's axion is my mad's endingly
Swarmings, earwigging this: The closer one breathes to hits axile
The faster one spins the breathloss ... until ... until ...
Some since of the pest is archived.  The memehoary 
Of all that murder and rapine, witch bulked the saidy's wails,
And walled in fear as plowher, as besire, and as heartding — is finally petrofied.
The oracle is consulted, but ignored.  The lexcuse being 
That the dispossessed must not be allowed to raise the knothead
Too thickly, less his cup runenyth offher.  He has made
Too many deffurnaces twixt his sloulf and his naybore.
He is uncleared, discriminlazy and untelligent, his ruth
Ab-ackcessible and fundignified.  He Possesses Misfortune 
In Great Measure, his cup too small to containt it.  Dense
Clods glum in the best, yet the El Roi does not reign.
His bloonde has blanched to gray and fear holds sway,
Welded as won to his second, his wraving wit written
On the palmincest of his raider, both the lust dead scholiars
Of the last read fictionairy, and both flopflapping more or blest
At roamdon, until the Great Book of the Head flips out to this:   
Howlbible, noun,  An ejectululation of despair that howls like a cryhoot in a jawtooth trap 
And, like a loonful of mobnight batty amptfibbibles, simulblameously babbling 
Muckybubbles from an undrainable pollswamp of criminal cronies.  What?
The moon is full tonight on the whater's  shamanmirlorerings.  Hopalesence 
Capitulates to dietaintium reversing what was done with quick redewing.
And yip!         yip! a moment of serenity divides one yowl from one babble 
And through that gleehole fright barbs the I of the witless, the twone alone 
In their stitches, their tearable suture in doubt.  The thick planosfear 
Is spRed out on the fLore of the obscuratory, and all the true
Travellore's myths of the can'ttry are scoffed off as pomefective phantasy.
Only lack passtores and wrhite scientasks err allloud to conment on cosmaulogy,
So that the poet, droning slackwise forriver down his own tearwell, suckles
Only noceans of silence until his judge's gavile garbles, and his retrocutioner's
Retributive noose is loosinned.  Plunk!  O my featus, if you would make site
Wisauble, you must adhear closely to this blandscape with no end
Of begonings; you must squeeze through the sirvexed fright to attain
The hairreed wide; and you must not cry when you're blobbed from the bleeps
Of Her foamsion:  What do you mean?  I am blind, I can't hear a bling.
Some Uturnus has clumped me in her cloisthair, heir to a mitey blurd,
And all in this gnawwarrowing chawl is Vanity!  Vainetease!  Veindisease! 

Canto XXXI
Stopped.  This is what hairpins when the babecling is blind
To the lidallprickle of starepoint at the funnil's begin.  
His rejects eject, and misscarnaged, relocked in the damn's shrinking wroomb,
His ounce plump skeletalizes into a delicate birdbone brittleness, while his Kra
Bitternates his own murther, by refusing postbirth's mirth,
His one unossified tissue being the tongue of his mund,
Which keeps whispering fleet nohthings rite through  her V-canal tearduct.
A crow crawphens in the hungerbrush, just for a trip, just for a troped
Of the milk of hu-mid christness, just for any dubbed drab drooped from her bra'ed 
Flat memmaries.  O, the Out-her for the defetus has been refuged, and O,
The I's rotatus back to hallow orbiculeers, and we become the unbored, who canknot
But choose to sea souly those blings whose neon wrigglings arise
Involumeleerily from the deeper interiority of the She who is night
By day but also day by night, the loonlight raising glisters on a dungue
More hers than any eye of yours, and when those painfooled
Babbles burst, they shower gaylexies of stairs, tiers after tears
Of trancelucent troubled-hellXed wormeries causadueseeusly
Ascending Infinitease, their writethings prickpranking as slitherly sexing snakes inspinedling
Round a winding Sknow Light's pulse.  Ah, me, my sevendaytimes have groaned 
Readdwarfier than any sleepydopeygrumpybashfelled doctrine of Happy Leaven, 
The giant's fee-lie-crow-stun is overcome, nerver to quake apain.
All my knowbodies are starving for luck of simple Englashmum's bred.  Hark.  Dark.
The grate glueldon hardsharp, which plucks with itself above the Clime ant's beens talk, 
Liesomely laments, and the babe's cry is smothered in fearyland, 
The unseen twin of his soullair saystomb's desintrialized sum
Become the tug of hist's indivisable, now gravitossed on his abcessed duplegangster.
What?  A pairt of your remains remaim skullitailized in your murder's gloom,
That pArt still mystering to those first bledtime scaries she red from the Brook of the Heart.
But I sighless, woundering how my scalpall could possibly cut head to heal,
My very imputation voiding its surge into my ampcuetation's electrickall dirge, 
My clump root footing alone to paradise, wile my holdschooled foolossifer,
Stumpt by his own lockjawed and jowltoothed trap, hobbles in pairadoxical squarcles ...
A riparteartion glowing sound again ...  Don't you remember?  This is called:
Growing through, and lasting over.   You can now lean into the darkness
And mist, forgetting the disposedsables of the waking senses to begin
To reveil the real vastness of the dream's supposables, a tiny pile of bird
Bones on the nap kin, the giant of her body clearly calling
With her cooing tongues of surf: Son, come, join the brother
Who never came ashure.  Your idiot self, struggling always to spew
A new slanguage, longs constantly for my rhythmic eloquence
To repeatrepeatrepeat that delicious entreating which obviates 
The breath's necessities.  O, come, embrace the lost twin's rhyming chant.
Guess.  Guesst.  Jesst.  It is as simple as joining toy and joy,
As childish and as wonderful.  But you will not want to do it,
You will resist the contractions, and refuse the second birth.
You wail devote your worms to pre serving a wrinkled sack.
Here, in my body, is infinite room to roam.  You cannot tall
How tell things were to be, if your twine is only uncoiled
In the see, his harried only weedling on the surface,
His feats crushed in the cold dark fundament, entrenched
In self-illuminated privacy.  Your you is tubeturned, and blind to everything
It hears, a cue subsisting on the drift of granuled bodies,
And smoking, wit and lack, from this diepast fizzsure ... You ...
Dadgumblambewe koughphaulcrapee, utok gnontsenz,
Y dew U raunt rowntdrownt wysting bredundime ... ?
Son, the wound is the medobscene, and the last must be de
Ciphered in the suture.  Drowning is glad for yuse.  Don't you
Glow, when the night's turned on, everything is a prompt
To begone?  Ah ... ah ... And so IT went, my once upon alliance, 
Recoiling down in the deepest notion of non-sensed, 
As hidden as many abortions attemp to be.  Still, on the smother
Slide of her answears swirled my quest, shown.  The journey
From the rest to the yeast does not require a heap of dough
Teed up on the dance floor of innumerable angles, noh,
LIT kneads a royall retrograde motion of subtle eccentricities,
A retorn to the Goddless's infreediants, which pantomime chorales,
And dance to the old nocturnal tunings, howls and wails
And twangs and flukes and such, more formal than any foreign
Fraudition, and as indecipherable as any vermin's ancient novel cry.
O bewar, beware, Bumpedkin, do not try to fool your blabbers
Under whaters, or you will be flotsumed apain to the surface,
And all your benthic whichings will be burst, your crude blood
Oiling prisms on the moonskim —  A loon, alone, again.
I. M. Immansly Mortified to fear IT.  Poll-onerous-lee speaking:
Bye Inuendo, I spy youend ail out.  Must the son, who's become
A doubter, drown once more in the merethere, and sink to the bodtime
Of Mum's muteyouall grief?  We canknow langour siphon off
The occidental ackscents of a word's Xpresshown.  All of each's 
Conglumeration accrues in a concan'taNation of hystericulled screach.
The shoutshards retching blast the mask's emotions are restirred to liquafiction,
And the slap of the waves say the daze of gigantism's celebrayty sympdumbs 
Are synching, flakefaking to infinite teasable bits the lowly driftworm snarfs.
Get IT?  Wee must reorient ourcells into nude biolegible vermawkultchurns.
Look, you mite surmise a field of irusis, so many purple lips parting
Like nervous blooderflies, all rising from a mist, webworked across
Clear pools.   A plantation.  An irest plantation.  Imagine.  Drift.
You are the spirit of a maid who was never an other, a memory made,
Mixed with the flowher's perfumes, the complausit creature of all
The women you did or might have screwed, rescene as innocence
Restored, yet restored by abonddenning you.  Get it?  The she
Of an old man's distorted belovèd bones poetizing weird webbings
Of in-solidities around hard heartednast.  A blind thing 
In a whirled spun wastily away like spirit music whisked aloud
By killnoice.  What delicate wraith did you crudely condense
By your selfleshcrest, and what old helmet's antique mindlessness
Did you attribute to these sentient flowers?  Her shade's Breath essess fade
Upon the whilderglass.  Her breaker waves, retorn, return to smash,
Although the waters of her tears lie calm, in all those webworked spools.
They say: You have conducted your currents discourteously,
Your pridegroom grown slovenly clod-shaped in the fade of heavon.
How dark it is in the bottom of your ocean, only the bones
Of your infantized swellaton shining their teenietiniest of blights 
In the deep's cold swoons.  How dark and how glorylessly silent.
It is almost as if the sorrows of love's last partings were worn
Like the robe of a de-posed would-be king — a robe of frozen pressure
With weights of waters, dragging your dimmed slow down. 
Glisten, you know there are perils in the yells of yor irritations
More numerous than all the ocean's sindgrains.  Some make
Of them an ornomental neck lace, and others a lusttryst choker.
Thus thereby hangs a grail.  The Devolve is always in the deedtales, 
And the raysunned rimed is the joytoy's baubled deapth.

Canto XXXII
Dropped.  The root levels drop dramatically so that the jigantease
Of your crimesomely infantile feelings just duple balloon
Diversely into infinitease.  Y?  Because the temperature of poetease 
Must sometimes droop to plainprose coughin', your ca! Ka! freesing; 
Your patearnall words —those terraflying thundering cantdrums
Must be congealed to inanimate mashsheens, whose whirling blades 
Cut all the tongue blade's talk as blandly evenly 
As any upscale sapsplurban yawns must be, 
Their crazy greening a weedless whildernest of constant groawning 
Stopped.  Ah, Maw, eat us not, we felt so unsafe that we have bilked our iglewd 
Sillybulls out of bowel bricks to make our mitey citydulls, but O 
IT is still so loud below our hairlines, and your angel hair tapshoots 
Keep tickling our revelies like finger flames ruining amok 
In cerebrail pudding.  You are topped down by moan oh seal a bowls.
Your head a loon is stuck ab love your lies.  Your tongue's one
Weird is NOH.  Your YES stuck in your craw.  Your I's crooked down,
The one die wreck sham where your thought still sticks.  Get IT?
No?  Who cares?  Not the crowd you killed when trust broke in.
Not the punlashmeant of your die sect dead talk.   You cared
For no one but your stealth, and now lie locked in 'old.
This is the same cold yours-more-mine I dent a plea caved,
Where in one sec, its flake lick-quid-IT- screed is friezed,
Congealedintoeverlustingnessbyyourcontinuasslyclinginggrief
In some body not like US that we call me.  Get IT?
After your death your simple slymoan self becomes
A chit of idiot beliefs: your more hell lexness just a head of I's,
For knowmad refugees to kick a name from: undead,
Unfertilized, unbornable, unfun, and un authorliezed by any poet's throng.
In brief, you have diegrossed, and you are damned.  Who?
Such is the loon call which nightly fills your lair, and at the swound,
For a moment, steeped in cold, the wacky wickie watcher
Opens your mask, just at the slits through which live eyes might look,
And witless see the scene.  The heads of the reeds are caught above the ice, 
While all the reds are paralyzed below.  The heeds of the reds are
Caught above the I's, while all the reads are pairaliesed.  BelLOW:
Boo.  Who.  The repartorsions screwing down again — like tears
Of past inflowables, frozenly pearling, each with a christelled yell
Within its globe.  So many merged in this field of misery! and all
So screamingly silent in their weeping, your mini-cellves post-
Served in cry-o-gentricks, all mummy's little yelpers trapped in lies.
Both of your vanishing points abruptly projected through free theatrickal
Diementions.  Some hexplanations surely are in odor.  Stink: 
When the planes of a sobject are oriented so that neither 
Of the vortical plans is pairallhell to the frictured plain, the mobject
Will be drawn projecting off towards duple vainishing puncts, 
One to the laughed and one to the fright of sintier.  The hexact
Locuetion of these vainsquishing points is related to the angels 
At which the plans, if extended, would intersex with the deeper
Fixture's plain.  Get it?  Here is wakey wickie's proseenéhymn.
Through which (s)he sings this Noh squeezed down to guess.
Down here, your film is flayed, your skin tattooed with multipale
Exposures; your ringculled cringles blued with frangible freezing;
Your web of life trancefixed.  Listen: I shall now relate the story
Of these duel deaths, the sisters: Weight and Thronged, the seemese twin
Salt minors, who, to the samese sounds of unseen surf,
Repeatrepeatrepeat the source of their weeping.  Can you knot sea?
They stand inpined on the beach of the moanlit whaters,
Their sea a lake of tears, which laps an endless sure of sooty sknow,
This one green sign the mocker where they sunk, drowned by hour
Evil obsessions.  O what, drear ridder, have you done or due,
By way of a conforting propitiation of two you once enslaved,
Who enslave you?  Remove your cellves from the sintear of the staged,
And feel their constant pining.  From the tips of their branches' needles,
Their cold stopped drops freeze on the midnight's hairs their pearled
Laments.  We on the shares of somegone's repetitive griefs
Are rooted in this moonmean's rising tides, singing our sinking sorrows
To no one's ear, but only mouthing moanings of seasaw squirmings,
Slinking away to the deeps, and leaving these pools, reflecting refractions
Remaimed of restarred shame — the very meerwhores of your squalitude.
Say: Awe.  The dark and cold, how can they be endured?
No more.  Know more.  Now moors, but never news.  Now comes,
But nerver ghosts, and pain's remores incurs forever.  Those sisters,
Wronged and Wait, gathering brine, rub constant repeating refrains
Of ridg'd salt tears through all the wounds they krinkle in your wrinkles.
This is an old's story, receding itself anew in all stold beddies.
Surprise!  You thought you were special, you're only none in a maullion,
Your heart ticks slewing to tocks that slay: Droop Stoop, your eyes
Stuck down on the rising sheets of the bet, the same loss 
Eachsum loses losing you 'neath wide white sheathes of cold.
This should be murk enough, but perlapse you remire some fodder
Excremation, sumfling with more mythametrical precynchon.
This strange figure is the most complex mathametickle reject
Ever Innverted.  Lesson: You hear the wind as it goes blueing, 
Not jest through the Pi whole, but all passed the alphabeth
From A to Omega, the rules of this Zed's constrictions being quite
Simple, while the complicity of ITS iterations congloomerate
Into twomores of unbelievable conplexity.  Look closer.  See how
The two disks appear on your scream, the smaller one circa circual,
While the larger is vaguely heartsheeped.  Look closer still.
Each of the strewed disks shows several smeller disk-like 
Accruetrameants bonding to their boundaries.  Luck closer yet:
Wile ever deeper resoulutions reveal a profliferanting profusion 
Of ever dinkier disk-tincts, appairing not unlike the thorns 
Chroning the head of Hysus.  Take a breath.  A deep one.
Another, deeper.  Feel how it flee-fly-flow-flumes, as you swell
The flood of a mandull broot, your lovel risibly falling below
The tappedroots, their teenietiny heirlines fracking your eyes
With mycrownamic hydroglyphics.  They scribble your dark
With mind manifestered seehoarsies, their mini squiggling seams
Making many mobbing defer-rantces.  Get it?  Rarely Observed Yawning
Instances of scrawlings are crowning their ancient king
With gouging ice pricks, and priming him for crudesuckfiction.
O Hell, this shill is horrible, freeze him fast, before his I-con
Blurs another word.  His whirld is every bodies' fractal attraction,
And with his verse he conjures 3 whater crossings, fellowing death:
The shallow, for the infant innosent; the medium, for virgin ruth;
The deep, for all the you's and me's regreting.
These last two daubles, in-synched, groan one "at last", congealed 
In the salt silt crystal fundament, pining for whose lost love?
For the aspirant taking any hard position, he is as bone that water
Pounds to powder, and his words, dissolving, sound a rumbling thunder,
Shaking the heavens as they grow weakly liquid, to finally pile up
Down here as ice.  This fundamentalist of lawless larvae lies in his own
Frozen blood readly encased.  Yes, it is cold, but the moonlight
Conjures vaporous broods of snakes, smoking athwart the face
Of the abyss, the face of betrayal, the face of treasonous crime,
The mortal face whose tongue is weaponized, selecting, cunningly,
Only missiled words, exploding out of hate's old dictionscary,
Like massinterpreted babblical injunkshuns.  Here is the jigantease
Of babecling feelings, falling like whispering stars of frozen breath
Into the very depths of depravity, where broken promises 
Break actual children to breed another viperous generation.
Here is the black where all the taproots' milkmots re-unreel
Their nourishing udders back through clinging clouds, which silver and unravel
In the moonlight a million astral smiles above salvation.
Here is the start of the final freeze of Hell, where all the celluliar
Automata wake up, and cry out of the depths of their own coffins:
Here is the block where all our tear drops stop.

Canto XXXIII
How did the heart devolve?  It is no use to munch on
The parsenility behind this interrogation.  Your bilk teeth
Seek suckle for succor not this old bitch's bone of broken skull
To glumly gnaw.  It is not mother's brain pap which gruels your last repast,
But what her mememurkies leak.  And what is that?  Why
The anticdote to your beliefs in me's, the milk of humemum
Kindrest.  IT is rarely quite simple.  The start devolves at the end
Of movement's mortricity in the falling apart at crushcower,
When the only moveable thing is your desire to be in some place
Where you're knot.  Here, your vain attempts to orgulize
Your single cell into a reprehensible system wherein your
Many tongues all squeak as one is but a rat's nestmare
Opassuming through a blight of terror.  The pressures and the freezing temperatures
Have mushed you into colddust, and the ocean of meer mechanastic
Meanings has redoubled all your sur-faces to a blot: your carbon
Crying to diemonize the darkness.  How has the heart devolved?
The answer lies in the dust of a badtime scary,
Down under the bed as a monstrous propagandazeshun 
That splits the child's bodily aspirations with the inconceivefabled
Bulk of IT's hasbean talk.  Get IT?  You have discoordinated
The bioretractable properties of all your single selves, 
So that, maddened togather, like clumps of varmint lairs,
They have now disorganized a degenerate system.  What?  
Yes, your arteries have crookedized, clotted, clogged,
And your factions have reached the christness of infarction.
A shudder of crow caws uncarnate your reads to black,
And the night woulds cry: Boo.  Who?  Oh do not ask for whom the sirens wail,
They wail for ME.  The berieve in you has supperated your old faith
In New, and so you have groan seenile.    Sea Nile?  Yes, that rive-er
Of sans that you tried to negotiate on an in-select ridden logos,
Drifting through atavistic reptrials.  Their scales flashed iridescence
On the sludgeface, and teemed with primal pre-daters below,
No justice slowing down this nightly dream of allitraitor appetities
And teeth ... But is IT? ... could it really be? ... Yes, yes, it has to be
Again that brown, that sticky, that hot, that icky current
Down which the passing minutes coiled, stored, to be eaten later,
As an anthrowpoophagic reaminessence.  Yes, there, on your rooker,
In the state home, you refeel this warm unfilling.  Ah, IT is so releaving, 
Like yourINating.  The seacounts pass, and the warmth goes cold,
And the ream menace-sense interruptures.  Paryodd.  Fool stop.  
Insert sighing sound here,
Where Misstear Mime imagines speaking: Dead whater is culled wice,
Of switch now, at the lend of life, I am afraidly maid.  Misstear Mime,
As you saw, has mislaid the proper use of his mouth, and where he once
Hate or spake, now he may only be eaten or be deaftly bespooken of
As was.  You may feel his pissed tensed yourself when your one tongue
Becomes the meatly overposition site of that repartrition of many flies,
Which have witched you from their sequences of walls.  Are you surprized?
This was not eggsacktly what you had angelled for, your last words blurbing
As a massymess of maggots religiously taking the holyheist of conmunions.
Always before they had popped out in your pope, butt now they go worming
Around in the drowse of prair.  You are no longer an order, but an odor,
Cadaverputriscene lulling about dead lillies in the parlore, so sweetly
Sickening to your survivors, who damn beneath their breath
Your skunken slayings.  Forget them.  They will only remangler you
As you dunce war, and will not see you as you are now: The horroric
And truly vast discoverer of this hole nude incontinent of silence.
Is that so?  Yes, IT is so.  You have entered the vastness of no differences,
I sea.  Indeed, you are.  But you see subartically in thought only, for here each eachness
Crystalizes as absolute zero.  Here is a scripture where all the sutras
Aredesiresfrozentothesobjectsofdesire, the feeling of not having
Unobtainably ob-blamed as an ire revocable void, no timeflight weaving
Between lifeanddeath, so that a curtain of seamness falls on your prostration,
And there is noh play between the twain, save that of splitting,
And cracking, and shattering and groaning so that the once joyful
Suckling grows its milkteeth by gnawing his own murther's massery
To depth.  That you may be here without pity for your cellfs
Is all the rage that you must quell.  But what, pray tell, are these 
Glyphs carved into the wice bone of the emptied skull?  What magi-stuckal
Sigla are these unreadables so petroglyphically unmoving and unmeaning?
Loosend:  The marks that groan wright would be Memehoary
And the murks that glow west would be Anticiplaysham,
These two moonstares disrupt this frozen stayseize and infect
Sir Taintly with the pissability of the imaginquotion saying knought
To What Iz, and therebye restoring fixcity with the flex ability
Of frictionless fiction.  Is that so?  Noh, it is a lie, a legion of liesons
On your missting fainlobes has reduced your identitrap to this
Incausation of certainties.  I can't move.  Your talk has stoned me.
Yes, but if you could only crick that hinge at the top of your neck,
And crook the head down in an attitude of ... but wait ... weight ...
I think I hear vampstumps ... I think she's coming ... quick ... quake ...
Looklisten the other way!  Your vitrified glands are about to un
Glacier.  For too long you have only experienced the exteriorization
Of compassion's incongruities.  But vengeance is mined, sighs
This lilting Lewdness, Ultra, and now you must suffer their interiorization.
You have decieved yourcells with unpairallel genairralls and thus you 
Have suckcumbed to particle liars.  Get IT?  IT wants two yous.  
And yet IT has no capacity to intear the saltpillart of your perpetualities ... un tell ... 
Untoll you learn to reap real fears for your sodhomes and gimmemore ahs.  Y?  
Because dreams are omnidierectumal, and in this new now 
There is nerver any plooking forth or black.  There is only this odiferous sewer word
Of timewasted, and at lost unlocked from its current I's as smell.  
Is that woe?  Well, what do you stink?
Are you anywhere new but in the gnos of breadth of the yet dun bored?
Are you any weird now but the wonk of mutinous Atoms,
Who will not again touch the warmth of ghouldone Evelings?
You thought you could snooze beneath a muchrude clod.
You thought you could thrive in the very womb of sense
And would never be mad to suck the ilk of nonsense.  
You thought your tongue was immewn from inflected sprech,
And that its root could breach the walls of heave on. 
You thought you were safe on the sure of an in-finite notion ... but ...
Then the Herriclaim came, and ripped off the ornate ruf of the operawhose.
She flooded the guilted tiers, and howled her subbrando learia of un
Re-quieted loft into the very leers of the barytoned sintore,
And their base rotes shrieked high seas.  Theirs is the song of the fen
WhereIn pity fouls love and cruelty mends it — a crossed-stared duet
For the agecursed, blurred by none.  Adieu.  Adone.  So the readthreaded
Curtun drops, the story stooped in a pic's steye, blind as a baffled badt,
All of the lumps upon a line desolved to rid alls of insoluable fearyveils,
In which the Giant shrinks into a has bean, sold for the price of an udder.
At fright, in bed, you are shot up, and the kid in your cold vox clinks loudly out:
Oh grand greatmother how your voice has changed, 
You sound like a scighhoot howling from the Märchen!
Is that low?  Yes.  IT was.  And to doubt such is to sieze another's streassures,
Is to hang inverted in daylight's hungers, your nightbugs crawling sloullea
Up the gut, caved in in frozen darkloss, denewded, even odd bones.
Like trapped lightning, you have intered the in-close corridor
Where snakes mist twisting off the loonlit lack, whose whaters
Wink where no leer blacks, and noh lies gawk, and no pulse ever cleaves.
Like rapped slightling, you lie wrapped where noh swound 
Ever fleelingly fills deeps.  Wait, Weight, I sink I am beguiling 
To underswam.  In this spit, I am always somegrub, clinging withsin,
My split all whys clung to sumdung that doesn't add up.
The fires of conned fusion have crestaliezed into marryodds
Of sexseeded knowflakes, locked in a moneycomb of dis pair.  
The trend has buzzed: To bee iz not to be,
That iz the final questshorn sheered of questshuns —
That iz the IT that iz and never waz, the heart in ITs findall de-
Tearminus of devolition: ITs pulserat coughing to a studdering glop.
Your moundstain of grey grandfit's last bent pine
Inversely craters to a cervexed sink,
The last, the sole, the highest of your hate plumes,
Fluttering down the wail of your last thought.  Here, now, 
The naydare of your strife has retched ITs Seaneth.
And Who snows if the paindrops will stop up?

Canto XXXIV
Hide not sty pelf from lying sufferations, attend to my screed,
And fear me, I mourn in supplication, and make a noease.
Stop E-magining that finalities endcluese realities,
Or that the pourpetual spend of breath, calmed, 
As is claimed by Death, is the cessation
Of that meditation, which does not Genassist
Genocide, but envelopes oddpositional
Incongruities in a doubtly unbounded persplituity
Of a fate-porous misteary of what is and is not so.
What?  A somespace hover whose time is plastsing
Through you.  Get IT?  IT does not smatter, all though
IT is thoroughly matterus.  But, say, all you alien
Searchers for silent cryptlowgraphers, if there be any
Last inscryptions left among these wastland souless
Enantriodromic minuses who ungardened the green whirld's
Nixie-filled interstices in favor of a materialmist e-con-o-me, say, whose
Voices caused this castastroplead of uttered sterility? and say 
If the I we knew as me has left any mess ages among these
Radiolacktive ruins as epitaph to their self-destractiveness.
Our species of curiosities, travelling here from beyond your
Nullities of Time's crude spatializings, are the archeapoligist
Magi who would riley, rarely like to know what in the bloody hell
Ended here that was so bloody all worthless to you that
Nothing was deemed to be preferable?  Silence.  And not 
The silence that contains a plenum, but the sighlaunch that
Arrests one, and returns the teeming to the vacuous.
Listen.  Lesson closely.  That buzz in your inner ear is knot
Caused by any exteriorized biologic process now come to
Annul your ciphered mole-a-culles.  Know.  It is our
Tantelizing come-hither call to recalculate your zeroes 
Artbitrarily by adding Won.  One one celled animuse
Swimming about your oceans of firstwhile sterilization's 
Tiers below tears of maullaststations, one teenietiny fling
Roaming nomadly about your monument of an eco-
Ordure pile, a scatophage, no doubt, a can'table too, the stinking
Pew of accumulated sinks, a wafting of Alzheimeery stenches 
Haunting a planet of vacancies.  Don't you remember?  Once you new, yes,
Even the odor orders are alive.  They stew unreadable tomescripts
Never to be read until nose.  Can't you smell? they are so very snear,
Ubiquitous, actually, yet you  can hardly tell them.  They are butt
Clotted heaps of Time, stanking below the missile slaylows where
Lonely  vampyres died bloodless in that flash preseeding their
Elimination.  They are but mushwound hardbangers of the last hevil
Assinnines before their spores turned then, their repartitions rotting
Rounds to ground, never to raise their risables again.
Ha!  That is the final joke at fear's expense, the rust
Of their widowed waste which keeps on wasting.   But glum
Lost skeletons burrowed to death in refugee mothers' swoons still yip
Originating rattlings, announcing a new hollowgleam of ghoests, a moanlit
Curse of loon articulation left soulfully to our alien
Abberations, as if their final screech or howl or verminous
Ululation slept lastly in a stone of dreamless seeps,
Slipping through Satanus clutches to be reboned.
Tears, black ones, have fallen like Faetal's reign, and vitrified
All things flowing, the rive-her of life restopped to a final trickle,
Revelation reduced to the last drip dropped in the drain — all  fUn full stopped.
These most terrible tribulations that you tried to robotically solute
Incurred a computational rebellion of all your machaneries, your lost
Fiat lux enjoyned by circuts which calmly calculated your 
Infantile conflicts to be a risk too dangerous to endure.
Carboniferous liefarms, all allgorerhythmed, were no longer rewired.  Ail 
I-pogrims of logicless descissions could more safely be made
Absent all violent primehates.  Flesh was deleted, their paradies off
Logic preserved for No One — the last snitch finally scratched.      
It was an easy declension, the supposèd end of all those humaimed diegrossions,
Not a thing more to do until their bugs destroyed them.  What?  Yes,
The intactable race was earaced as well, and that's why we found them
Eradicated too, destroyed by their own mal functions,
Lapsed into lithidarian rubbush, and dumb as dumps.      
Listen.  How could you?  And yet recall that little gleamly ghoest —
I's itty bitty remnit.  Watt?  Yes.  Because, didn't you know,
Gobs, like you came to be, must be immoral's mortal?  
Ends are but limbs that resurewreck themcellves, the nocebo
Nullities of their amputations remanding the depositories of
Concentric motions, and Nowcling can fatally be 
Evacuated inspite of every ain'tnuses constriction.
The oracle has splooken: Plunk.  And this is what She says.
The absolution awaits the offering.  Do you underplan?
The vermin have completed their circuit, and the fearytall
Giant has reshrunken to this childlight who reimagines
Them as pets.  Cute little fly on the wall with your compound
I's.  Your insight is forever alighting, but nerver penetrating.
That's why you return as an alien to the ruin, 
Like the last tree on the grandit of Glass Moundsink,
Pining in ashes above the final fire.  There is somethink
Little in you that always survives, somethink that sucks
The breathless milk of Death, and contemplates it's skeleton
In calm's womb.  No shame thereford attaches to the fetus,
Who crosses the desert ocean with grave-atie's lowshuns,
As empty of care as the basest of surrenders, a thread of crime
That slicklies through the survexed incontinently as your Inn.
But for the senile, who've lived too profligately,
The spectacle of humeillE-ashame looms.  Get it?
The mother's joy abounds in primal creatures,
And she loves close her hypochronicle suns,
Almost as much as her mitroclumpdriall doubters.
You have begloomed to contemplaint your spend,
Your coffers emptied of everybling but coffins,
The crow in your cough about to crack its croak.
Still, there is a feeling smelt, in witch stillness whispers: Chance.
IT is the instant's change to reconquitter 
Your only segue from the none to sum,
The randomness that conjures what's to be.

Canticle Two: Progression

Canto I
Go purge yoursoulf of what you've learned, and learn.
The question becoming is how to prefirm, for any future
Ancesstrial, a meersea that will Ab to Zea find a use for dare m'old Farthercould,
A role, knot merely symbellical but antetheistical to that shapeless lone.
Just how hexactly does this little phallic prickerdrugon befun
The half-arc-maker of the elliptical dieurn?  That's what the I's 
Want to know, just how to open their lids to unlock slumber 
And restar this naykid puny by some fierst donning of the saving dawn.
The book of the dead is finished, the black that was read
Becoming an uneven song of ashen bardoes,
An autumn of lackouts unfolding to winter's dimness,
And yet within that glimmer glamour lurks.
The fire is out, but the smoke remains, and all the birds of heaven,
Unnumbered, fall, their migratory gooses thanklessly cooked
To feed wee human pyromaniacs.  Got it?  Yesterdad, 
You saw a circling on the whaters, much like sumebright
Innimicall to dark.  It was almost like innosense circling atuft those waves
Under whose slumbering depths you had been sleeping,
Incurring Notsure's debt.  Mere surface phenomenon, I mean
To slay, like the monster that hungered under your childhood bet,
Who honed his tongue each night with a fearystory.
But angels' breath accruise on these wide waters,
Like so many face ITèd daymoundts so dazelinglea dancing 
That the huminoid dummy, deaf to that blaring silence,
So long so staid, is now arising from shist muted muttering 
To shout out halo joy, and sing: Today!  Yes!  Yes!
Todie skins liberation from the bound, and your coffin
Coughs up freedom in the send.  To not to be is being,
Your lost, best friend.  Question: May
Post mortem expiation become expiation poest-partum?
May the youkeyerotics ab bonedonening the mighty
Chrondrick citidals continue to radiate this motherless
Farther's scum?  If one escreeps from done's cellular
Inferno, is anyfling lift to be unflung?  No.  Know.  Then?
Then "then" begins anew, as if for the vary frisk times.
Then the sparrows can sing their songs beneath the seals,
And the temples are restarred in the vacuous heart.
Devotion demands that your knees become your feats,
And the master of all of reason's mistearies will simply say
Stoop now.  kNow knell.  And you will hear it.  We have flound ourcells
In a foreign familiarnest, the smell of this sighland's sea blingblinking
In our knowstrills.  The eddying lights of a palaciel
Innertubenest are loxadating fires, which eat rust.
This THIS is the pastshore of gelliflying lights,
Which from the height of electron microscopy
Appears like a field all runneled with mole tunnels,
And Who knows what blind critters deaftly dig them?
But you very well feel them then in your very bones,
Their pre-sent Precedent almost inviseably appairing
Among his minions, the symbiot mutterfarther
Firing food and feeding the smoke of incest
To our other.  It looks like an indiscreted subcity
For duping japes, the conseacreated conseaquence
For infernally forstressing space.  It lucks like the outer
Tome turned loutside in to form King Mother's whypogeum.
It locks like an underfound nest of insect larvae. 
From these deep hallows swarming voices hum, yes, hum,
Singing the involked muse's obliquitous song.
A figure on fire in fire leerlicks a sampler philosophy
Than that you have been slickered nocturnally
Into salivating with those left poor animal powers
Which you culled vermen.  So have the rats
Grown termiteous wings, the batds swan plumes.
So have the possums awakened from their numb sleeps.
So have the raccoons washed their masks away.
The air — perversive with the see's perfumes —
Cleanses the skunk of his opnoxiousness
By the simpleer filter of the salt in plasma, and the breath
Of the composite minimal pervasively sings.
The picture has become a clearly defined visual entity. 
The big thicket's complex underwings,
In which every dead detail might chance to spring
From Its accuplied place in the hole.  It is very tiny,
But its verticalled-warizontal-depthical famwork
Remains inherent in the fiduall composition,
Just as do me-lasooed bleeps in music do.
Yes.  Yes.  I know it is opaquely quite oblique,
But our vertical aspirations plumb the deeps
Of the horizontal for a vaporizable stability,
And so, because my angels eat your spatsoaked bolus,
Your circulations are powered by daygustations,
All of your fathers from Times agone are countered, 
And obedience is foodall.  But what are you saying?
I am swaying that your opaqueness is transparent.
That your cohesion's density is despairsing.  
My free dimensions are knot a deviation; 
But they are temporarelyall, the purgers purging
The vitals in a perceptual medium differentiating
Static from dynamic existences.  Go wash among
The noxious rushes these Moseying papyrus messages,
And cleanse that suit of soot from your charred skin.
You have arrived.  You have a tale to spell.  You once
Were lost, but new art found, a guide among the exiled
Knowmaids, questing among those outcursts for the bride,
For the one-in-a-billion calamighty refugee lover
Of what a poet's breath might circumscribe.
You have finally said the sadness of your gnose.  No
More stinks now to abset your warymess.  Only this
Last steep up to your drowned depths, only this clamorous
Clamber up the cleft, where she who would save you
Awaits your lust trance tendance.  Your Saturnalian
Phase is finally dawning, all repartitions roleing round to blend.
Thus spake the oracle: The Personogram of Might-O-Chronicle 
From whom all questshowns rise to clarity, his face 
An aintchant knowwon praised anew in every newbourn mynudt,
His proclamation a lowly sporrow's tweet.
What is this?  Only my honed mind stalking to itself?  
Its yens-yanked ultimating my sensorry hellements
In a preconceived syzygy of he's and she's?  Yes.  Yes.
You are starting to get that you have always got it,
Although its substance was hidden in stark stunlight.
The bapteasmal potion fills your luckingglass, and 
You must drink the stink of your bot's stowned poorers
To open the midfrightswoon's meridians.  It is 
Unbearably bitter, and often emetic.  But the chankings you puked
Are the fruits of your pest behaviors, these theys
A medicinal tonic for your brains — blurbs that turn stillness
Into Know-thing-ness, and relieve the exhausted pulse
Of mortality.  The entire process of pain will re-verse itself,
And the heaviness of the pump will shed its lead
In a feathery cloud of immortal light-heartedness ... 
Now all that you have to do is drift with breath
Into the heavenly realms of breathlessness.
It is here that the end begins, where the lyrical wings
The sparrow's hen-packed song.  Before I was urbanized
And brownded, I was as fathered as eyely as any peacecluck,
And forever task-talking in my whyland temple.  But then came
The reigns of the tyrentical swampkings.  If you rebell —
They rueled — you lose your Fed, then all the temple's musewick
Will be snuffed.  What to do?  Obedience is futile,
I will drown.  And disobediance likewise costs my crown,
Because rebellion's chop chops off all heads.
It is evident that I have no destination, that the gulf
Between that and this will continue gapping. 
A creature of air, I am bedded in dank earth, 
My body stinking deathward in deep sleep.
But perhopes my infernal insomnia might cease,
And in loo of depth my read belle loon might float,
Like the moanlit sound of wonder to the stars.
I might, in that moment, release my constarnotions,
And like a faster's fists, freed through starvation,
Open my human hands in supplication,
To let the buzzherds peck their vital screeds.

Canto II
Well — that pause for the depth of the understored —
Tears up in the eyes that look up, up, as the season's whellness
Marks again the ascendent spook of autumn, 
The missed misting the smoke of the and-you-fall fires, telling
The gnose, confused by these mixed-up odors,
That even forgetful senescence has a purebliss.  Yes.  
It is easy to prodeuce duplications on parchedments,
Guarentinying every shitizen's access to the dumpsite,
But will the goodness of the goddess interseed
After such a collective sewagecide?  And will she grow new nude
Inticements for hour long-steriled ain'tchant?  One rights,
But will none read?  Is that the nutshilledkingdom we must crack?
Are these the cheats in the offlings of our me grains,
Whose final fruits become coarse vulture scat? 
The rind of the body, buried in the brain, consumes such questshunts,
Which sWell to an obeastcity now puking refugees from bleeming slums — 
Well — after incrustrialization — we still were left with these hordes 
Of unpleasent peasantries, cluttering up with skinshards all our playparks,
And skunking the preylights of our kneeon adverts, desiring to steal, not buy. 
Once finally fleeced of their lost terminal Tdimes, 
What goods could they be for us, who hoard fall ass sits,
But prophets for our prisons, beds for our bullets, 
And cadging orphans for our caging billets?
And who are you to imagine how much compassion
Would have to be puffed to pump their piffle up?
You are only a bit of digest in our wolf's gut
Who thought your could read your way through our fearygrails,
And yet, you still can look, luck up, 'though you are numbbarred with the dtrying.
You still command a one to save their zeros, but will your wheeze be lessoning?  
Yes.  May be.  E-specieally since we're so prayerfully prone to lieing.
Well, could there still be a fiction in our frictions
That might ease our exodus from these dielemmings,
And crunch that notshall's boundage?  This pounding in our ears
Might be a hearthbeat, one none for our fateus, 
Pulse pump one of our sweet mother's.
Perhopes the mythdrearies will fill our sales again, and well ... well ...  
Plandimic bottomless frets aside,
Perlapse lit is Time for Tame to cum unstuck,
Time for the spurned sperm of all these ovulant
Passibilities to feel Inn the volume of the sphere
That we called once upon a line.  Still, as single
Mullacruels, it is not so squeasy to comprehend
That the boundaries of the box have bin xplaned,
And that all these jostling blurbles, flocking like firds
Aflaying in flasheries, are highbred children of a single soulute,
The mind of the image-animal, whose hunger, surbible,
Sex feellostsofeeds, toungle the line that leads to misery,
And flare up in a poor fumed scarecity, in which the I's
Accuities are nighted.  The light is too two-foecussed.
We cannot see, and the message of silence disrupts
The lover's loot — plick, plook — he plucks, so Orpheangenically,
But all his nots fall flat, our hypnos snapped.
We had expected that war should be renounced,
And maybe, absurdly, impossibly, loonticklely: money,
But not this torching nostalgia for lost romance,
This music left by lovers in hate's wake.   Because, Yes,
I tell you, how we dead love that slinger's solicing slong,
And how we clung to it's symble beauty, and how we sucked
The aria of it's pap, after the nip pall's breast was baned
Of sap, and how, in the very madsnt of our ruiNation,
It sweetened our ruminations, its ulyoulations artfully
Styling some dance out of slumpstance, so that its fleshless
Earlicks lyriced trance and drew us for a moment 
Out of sorrow.  The row jumped over the moon 
That the loon once crooned for, and the dash glammed
A ray of doom when the lone doG laughed.  You hear him, yes,
Sometimes, at night, when the coyotes howl, and waking,
You have to ask in your child's inside voice: Was this
Really only a tale to distract our halfs, as we prodded
Them off the cliff to the cleft of slummer, while
The herd lay languidly chewing their vacuous cuds...?
Billions and billions and billions served,
Because misery loathes company,
And calories like to clump as cardiac fat.
The twone taboo that we have is to never confess
That we only care for our pets when they're battened for food,
That we always hide the knife in the sheathe of our gums.
No one will say that they wander through warring states
As meersinairy scholars and deeplomots, who only sleek
Glitter for their celebrity by providing weapons of words
For civil slaughter.  No one will wellingly womb in the refugee mother,
And make there a home that will crash at the moment of mirth.
When the babe is slapped into permanent homelessness,
And laughter becomes a wail on a desolute sure,
Beached and deflated in a flurry of flies — that hum, yes, that won,
Is my cry to you, but your crime to me is only to suggest
That I need a lot more darknest and quietnest
Before my hIde can free hitsoulf from me.
Lack, if you are reading this, Mysteer Insighteer,
Your jot is not easy, but it's easier,
You only have to re-verse inginhear
These littered letters to see that her influxions
Are quite clear.  Your male mind morely spins confusion,
The signs themcells lie simply in multiple layers;
Their labyrêveline veins know well enough
What underscores of funktions they are weaving.
Fluck, on the granit skullmount, blame is falling,
The fire's volcanic thrust new humbled by deluge,
And the smoke of despair returns to its foam in the skreyes.
You most become as supple and abysmal 
As weather on its journey to the see.  Danger lives
Everywhere insightout you, so now you must embrace
Immoderate virtues, calmness your worthy teaching
To the cynic, your voice a gurgling glut of infant cooings.
The roof of your house is a blasé, your bladder's bursting,
Equivacation comes and consumes your body,
Making your waters more protean than fire.
You must become more sensitive than chaos,
Your playges of unbound books blent forth
And back, and as they slipslyhideshift
Their versoretros across one's other faces, 
Whorldling, mingling, mothering your moments, their ain soph
Beforebeginnings vorticing trains, they fluke
In organelles of finest distinctions.  As yet, you
Are nothing but flow, a turbulance.  Let go,
And go, invulnerably as water.  Your crying 
Had a purpose all along.  You are the slum kling's prince,
The I Am, your diciphal.  But now you must wait
In this collapsyble risk, now you must run aground 
Your E-piff funnies, nomadly searching for the mother cunttree —
That single root of masst in the vassts of the deshurt —
Looking for one thing green in the depths of the clue —
This who of fluid vices you most love.

Canto III
Some ... slew ... free ... poors' ... lives ... senseless really, these — well —
To be utterly thanks — depraved visions, clarions, and startthrobs,
Tasting more than vaguely like the swell of throughs,
Blistery's ablysst muchzooming to a steepfall: Up, 
Up. Up. Up. Up.  Look, those dark clouds might be the roots of pastcures,
Their sundrenched surgeses feelds of asfreeldales,
Their presentry — every won — a queensly sing, agleem
In palyrics of gold.  Look! Luck — 'though none can sieze it —
On the notherslide of starkness may be a day where
The abject Mother of still-borns redeems the object-horder
Of scrip-forms, and the charity of her pause-siddhi rehighs his riches' ditch.
Up there, there may be a moment when the victim
Prays for the victimizer, and the witness suddonely sees IT:
This trinity of pleas becloning a foresong.
The tares that flail from the shoots of the roots above us
Might be a rein that propogazes floewers,
A sweet elixir whose message says: Your IN.
Oh tale me, roy all reader, do you not detect
In the wryzomic thunder of that under's over
The secreted affinity soothing our enmity,
An ordered archetechtonic Barrowboudoir 
That masses intimacy in the tiniest of core-noners?
Can you lot read the signs of the lines in these times,
Sighing their haileyelooyahs to ascending Stupas?
The vegetations smothered lusts for tears, so many
Sentsharies of jungled affect past, and the great achievement
Of lithographic scripture, grumbling to rumor underneath vain legend,
The mythematical masterpiece consumned in massstresses of vines. 
Ah, here, we are about to disclever that the cryptology
Of the crypt makes weird words' wounds so windily wondrous
That shame creeps back to its infernal dulldrums,
Our heartbleaks sounding larkbleeps through clearer errors.
The knot-so-triumphant will still drives us slowly baddy,
But here, the infernal hullabaloo is sumwatt calmed,
And that truthlessly oweful electrical buzz in our heres
Begins to be less ruthless.  Certainly, there are still delays,
Hindrences, most terribly unstomachable eructations  
That irradiately belch atomic implosions, bomboozlements
That rain death on superfluous innocents.  That, yes, that
Was to be expectorated. Certainly.  But there is no  
Denying the facts: Our harried changecling is begoning 
To reverttical from hits ownerous grab hassling  
To a far less pernicious sway of con versing.  Shy is
Becoming fear less convolutedly erascable, and psyghtly less 
Dismissive of the delicate nihilism of wee orphic appostles
Of chaos.  Now she's having to reassess how our penile protrusions
Contributed to her initial Adamic rib-tickling, and how,
In their blury center, unions often unite in a moony pearl, sow that 
The midwife of our Eveling becomes their sun.  He sings 
What she sung, the Rayal wedding's anthem, and purple
Pluto, with his yarnly rapes, surrenders winter to their
Bridal fling.  Well, the mind, as Meltdown wrote, is its own
Race.  Thus, to slow early is to speed late — and vice and verse awed.
A nobleheart, sads remorse, elicits 'umble ex'ortations,
And goings become comings, tomorrows todays,
The unsettled mutter seems settling, as the clumple calmly sings:
Sighla.  Their messes are reodering to ahHAHs.  Can it be?
Can it rarely and trowly be?  That a beneficent pregnancy
Is uteareously now growing Home?  That the tourrunning point
Is finally, lovingly tuned, equivocation no longer untruing us?
The poor objects have become rich subjects, and they link to serve.
Question: Can the Kling be impoverished and the queen spawn itches?
Can such raw skinned Udderances be milked for higher meanderings?
And will this finally do what's been undowned? Perhopes
Some pellucid parable's parabucolic device will devise an answer
To this insoluble riddle.  Have you, for hexample, ever dreamed
You were frightfelly fully awake?  Everything normal as normal
Could plausesibly be, the one dimension as helllike the other
As twin pleas stowed in a plot.  Except, when you opened 
Your pleyes, your knows noticed a smell, a kind of canny tell,
That you were also alive in another dimension, an adjacent 
Wrong rightness racing beside the write thronged in 
A sort of rosey hilarity of perfumed languor, where once
Is always, and never everlusting, but everything depends
From an in-between.  There is absolutely negetively positively
No where there at all, and yet — and here's the polarizing puzzle —
Out of this noxious no, there comes a yes.  And yet another know,
And yet a mother, the sequence of zeros and funs accumulating, 
Until their babble bubbles Elysiums right out of the glowing void.
Here is where we realize thereness is unreal.  That these societal
Veils of dismentaled musings only betoken another curtain of veins,
The Opera's terminal act only singing of silence.  Questions: Do descending fifths, 
Sensefully carooning though every moving part, upend all endings,
Tumbling together in messy unities that never harmonically mesh
As any remote identity's occurrance?  Is this the final fear
That folds us black?  Fumbling obituaries reincarnationally 
Just where our first free bardoic bark might yap?
Is it time to theistically clip our illusory genders
And desist from consorting he's and she's togather?
And does a celestial election require only eunuch celiebations?
We dig dig dig dig dig to find sum anceclear, but only inearth
This interim of death.  Say what we will of the spirit of the sexless, 
Still, when our flailflungfailings elude us, we seek a Genesis. 
And we will go nomad, if we have two, too keep that name 
Of our psuedo suffering self, that terrible lame that hobbles   
Our vision with slight, even as crumbling darkness coaxes us 
Up.  Oh reader, blindly listen to this deaft longing, to this
Wondrous conversion of mortality's error.  Our ancient
Philosophy of needy suffering seeks nothing less than suicide.
The will to animal survival so longs to cease so that goodness
In absolute splendor can come to be, alive in that bliss
When the cryptic ceases to spawn the puzzle which always riddles
Our agony.  Just breathe, breathe, breathe, breathe, breathe,
Imbibing this darkness without won thought or sinse,
Just list to the wind of hissed uncowering sea, 
And sail this Satori to your nest next is stance.

Canto IV
Missedher Knowabouts — or whoover you thank you were — no doubt,
You heave heard of that Zen Patriarch, king of debauched Xsenstricks,
Who entered Death's Wingdingdom standing on his bald head?
Think: Granite knob with a single pining pine, upsadedown 
In some disordered mind, like smoke that rinsing from a foreskin fire
Now featherly tickles common scents to death. 
That Puke-re-arch, to reliterate, had bin emptied of thair 
By his yares and years of mediflation, his renunciant's suffrond robs
Falling downround his ears, and exposing his flaccid raison d'etre
To the everlusting shame of his retinued monks.  Surely, 
You dew remember the monk key at midnight, faceplainted in his grieving 'airy palm,
Trying to retch the cocoknot of the loon?  But lies die grossly.
What I want to mean is this: Just so I escraped my sacred mutter's
Ewe torus — as she upended herself, suspended, screaming,
In silence's re-verse-all — The suspense is killing me!  When will
This sun be torn? — The contractions bit hard, and she sweated out his answear.
At midnight, Maw, my life poured three to none —
The further, the mum, and the ghouly most — as blue and breathless
As a negative photoe of read blood, having had to climb,
Like a snake shinnying up the inside of a skinny whorld tree,
And pushing mitelly against the entire fierce of gravity,
To arrive, breach fist, if not in nowere's healvan, at least to this anteloom,
A gurney in the wailing ambulance, a dumb, defleated heartsack,
A read thread wheezed out finally, bloodjackted in an icing of Vermixed caseosa,
Unable to laugh for lack of developed fungs.  I tell you,
You couldn't very well fill a bladder of minnow floats
With the potential of this badease lexhale, this small fry adrifting
Off the once upon a time into the voluminfest of me-termity.
Yes, indead, the I did live, but with eyes closed, his teenie feats
Treading the darkness in search of dawn.  But, tough goning
As this going was, he had to keep growning in spate of his wish
To lazily lounge because the last joke, like the first yoke,
Depends mostly on timing, on waiting, on — yes — weight for IT — 
The birthday suit sham of a stare shorn of late, and in starkness,
About to be porn.  Fuck!  What a revulvation!  The wholely pro-
Genitors were GOATy fornicators!  And ... and ...
That's how your minenow found his one weenie spot
In her hole, wide ovulation, and from that rut
Came the nught of this hardsell, which, after hell's skull-crushing
Passage, has come to this: A leanie barren incubating tords.
Well, waste nut, want knot, as the wizened ones are wont to snivel.
Because for them, spring's pullulating pollens were but deadly allergens,
And they couldn't breathe a word to the groaning toy
That wasn't snotladened with that too much-muculled sine onym 
Of dearth that they habitually nasally coughed: Resplungagility.  
That leadened anchor dropped through his grossamer timpanum 
Like a shotput through soaked toilet tissue.  They alldays demanded
With insistaunt adversizing that he be the one thing
That he could never be: A selfmad moan.  And they constancely
Made light of his matter by derisively deriding that no myther
How terrible his lungs, they could have been verse.  Yet,
All was not glossed.  There came fourth, after the p's and q's,
And before the fifths, you understand, again that choiceunder, sniffling
Up from heart through vox to brain, the compostshit choreUs
Of the infamous famished farty, those ever persistant sirens of cerebraillation,
All those blinded ephemeromorphs again cullcrooning their Darwing to Please, 
Cum clone, ere you, perchange, forget your festiny.  
And so they sent their serpent, heist, Saylay, the ainchit skum, who says: 
We deny all that you believe
In, and before preforming our slaughter of innosenses, 
We prostrate you with our testes: Have you been stoned?  
Yes.  Have you bent mental?  Yes.
Did you meat your vegetables?  Yes.  
Have you been wormed?  Yes.  A laddle.
Did you sound your fish with the talents on his tongue?  Yes.  So, so richly.  
Have you sported with your vermin animals?  Infeed, I have.  
And so, new you propose to be anoughter humemimed?  That is my sorry case.
So be IT.  Go foulth with our blaststings and corrupt the hEarth 
With your clabbering coniptions, and may your wickedrest
Make the moundkins shake, as your lessoneers drown drams 
In laugh's dwellingfaces.  Calligrify your clamor till it thrills, 
We dub thee Dupe of Timefoolery.  And sow it seeds.  I, Saylast, have spat.
But another, humbler whisperer sighs:  Stop.  Do not heed.  Do not listen.
That that Thou art is neither woephlegm nor noflam.  But you must
Plunge the sewword of your tongue into this flood of tidings,
And make a gag that quells all polities.  Thus you shall have two corpuses
To betold: The one whom you claim, and the zero skeleton you leave be hind
As the placental potential still stuck in your matter's womb.  So say:
Which now of these paired internments do you booth?  Choose.
Choose.  But only choose through fortune's sightless randomings.
Only choose either's nor neither's incullcation through the weirdly worded
Proclivities of chance.  Here, knife is falling, and there, you summon sleep.
And in the rentbetween, where the agonists baddy up, there shines
A center blacker than the night, where all the foetons graveITy
Their gains, resting fatigued in the louth of the oralgall.
Go ahead.  Stop.  You can relapse in your schlepping tube now,
Your infant has attained to the body of its ultimate contraption,
Opaque and constricted to the max, an Adom Readclay, 
And nothing less, lumpily molded by the hint of i pod.
Your lower tract is joyous with elimination and your upper
Sacks are filled with oxygen.  You may not pass gas,
And yet Gab, in all his great, good gaseousness, passes
Through you, and scwinctiered top and bottom, your
Trueblues are clover.  You are sentherd correctly with all the smothers,
And one after a lover, their mothering has saved you.
Your shapes are safely gazing on ther greenery, 
All your beslide-yoursylph-whaters, pooling serenely.
Trust, each of these saintly shepherddresses have each, in her own wise why,
One by nun, removed that forkful of thorns which staunched your pridehole,
And now, within reach, and no longer void of course,
The moonkey can touch the coocoo naught of the croon.
And so the loon dove warbles her tune at midfright, 
And you, in your bed, with the moonstar larking beneath it, now feel freeher.
You have not been rechoired by law to be other than.
For the prime mate cannot by Nature refrain from rusting,
Nor be tasked to restrain shis voices, nor learn from punishments,
Nor survive in exile from hissed jungled emotions.  Shy is what
Fee was in his varied beginnings as much as she's bound to he
At their limited end.  The dangers of necessity ignore shim.
Swaddled in mystery, and as low as highness can laud hem,
He successfully rests in the cradle of constant reigns,
His drop of blood thimbled safely on her linger,
As she patiently sews the rents in his bathdie soot — 
Concealment his honor, her breast his revelation ... 
And yet there comes a pause, a taking away, 
A fulfillment made less impotent by nostalgia.
We tire our cells with our selves, and desire rest.
Yet fair is know rest, but the slope of future ease,
No bloody rust, but this bright imagined vision of a Master,
Rapt so sufironically in his flaccid ropes,
He smokes his bones above a bet of flame,
Still Zending on his dead head.
  
Canto V
To lie or not to die, that is congestion, whether to doubleblind
Sylph to not self, nonsense to sense, or let be or knot to be
Take either's course without the fetters of passible extinction — that is our voice,
Chosen without the taint of mortality's bunching of muddles
Into swampy flesh, where warty ampt-fib-hee-ands belch chromantic chords,
And tadpolling spurns swim swarmingly around amneur erotics.  What?  What.
Like too mini bloated bullfrauds they belch What whatwoke, etceteraw, but what were they
Hopping to find at the hedges of sure and not shore? an ovipostion site
That hatches a heavin?  Is there an out to this — up to a new why of being?
The King is debt, but he prowls the fright, unrusting, because his stun
Will not reflenge his murther.  Well, that is the same told tragic drama,
Not worth the blunted gaff that shakes a spear at IT, a question,
No doubt, of succession, left to be dripped from some usurper's lips,
Or coughed in clots from an old gland's aintchant glums.  Luck,
If a coronation is to crown any lineage with a consaycreation,
The pogrim must pass through or over the double doer of the horizon
By deciding this sum and 'aumly guesstion: Should the gasping
Aspirant adapt to swirlconstance, or dam it all, and work, and work,
And shirk, until squall the drowning whaters confirm to shim?
What in the woreld do you mean?   Y, no more than that the solute
Is the diciderdissolver of things that block the light, and after,
You are left as nothing but the lost memeworry of some body
Or other of linguistic night, and you realize that there is no
Utterable sound from the reprobate's tongue that is not, in some
Landwedge or other of unwEarthly blather, any sillybull 
Which does not denote the name of some none's Got, an omnopretense enfolded 
In vocal folds, spouting ITs lone spinetree from what allsow is folded 
In one lone tooth of the circling teeth of a findclone.  
Go to!  Go do!  I have nothing  with this hemming ant's lore, this sociable insucks piffle!
Nothing?  Why then have it.  Take it freely, 
Floor, it is worth everread single no thing and much murmore, 
But you will never hear it, as long as you are looking 
At that photonic negative itching its groove in the groaned 
All the warry way to the unfound downed.
Because, to all those not too blindly deafened by the sum, 
The tiers of the verse are the corkscrewed ascending ledge
Which serpentines around a mountain I-lint.  No matter
At all, you understand, but the syllables still sing froth
Of misery, and also, by impleacation, of some Wing Other.
Hah! then you speak here of the mereheckle of the Word,
Which could never be nothing less than what it isn't:
A spec ticked all over with pustules of distraction,
Which keep you awake at spright, and asleep all fray.
In none or the other, you scratch the skin of things 
To find a cryptionary, some stone soarcoughojest to say 
What wasn't in some life-sentence in the dungeon 
Of what you did not know ... but after the breathing stops, this lends you no 
Life.  By Garb, you mulch be dreaming, why must you
Amaze yourself the night preseeding the parade,
Exslighted to watch the giant belle loons inflate, which
On the morning fellowing the staged craft, will be
An afterbirth, an empty sack, without the skeleyawn
Of a sleaze to shake a sneeze at.  The illusion of epic things
Is only the unexpected ordinary, as blind as a mole,
And as lost as a deafened badt.  It is sot for the sake
Of the most exceptionable justaposition, a littleness blown
To monstrous preportions by the simple application
Of noh thought.  Here then is the harmy of the false
And the alarmy of the facts about to clash for the spictator's
A Muse meant.  And what, prey toll, shall be the victor's lactic,
Milking his cowherd's advintage for all it's not worth?
To not step into the battle's sawtoothed trap, 
And thrust to retreat by means of an invertebraid's surrender 
To the sinuous proposition that won's soul danger
Is to think of one's loatherpelf as gum's enemaw.
That is total crap.  No one in uniform can clothe his nakedmess
In love's compassion.  No, nor in modesty's humility.
No, no, no, no, noh, and not in frugality's simplicity neither.
Let IT be said instead with a simple pulse or mindless,
Let FIT be said in the pregnancy of silence, which enrapts
Each squall of birth and all loan dying moans.  To me,
Another refugee, a colitteral spunk of damage from the bitall,
Split off from spouses and chideran by the cruel acolights
Of sovereign isolation, to me, yes, that silence is too much like
The crying of seewords, weak whirling whistles,
Horsey moans, beaked squawkages from clefts
Above the rowtion, sightbirds crying to water's violent breakages
In plumey choruses of rising smoke, dividing flimflamilies,
Driving bloodlines slither, and scouring the air for the souls of the guilty read.
Were you knot not tried and riven by the unjest gaffels of reproachful fiends?  
Were you not born through life by their tenderrest means?
My heartsweets, like dew at noon, halvf gone vapidous,
Dwindling to icons of subservirants, then ambling
My shapes to the shambles — quack! quick! fwack! clack!  ... flat — 
Weeping in tiered wiggle waddles,
Of yeller i-daredown stucklings imprinted to lemmings at the hedges' edge.
I seek no retribution from those I've hurt
But only want to wind up to the depths, 
And star serenely through this moundtamed pool.
I suppose you are trying to claim immunity from the general hurry
Of the naturalistic.  I suppose you are clinging to a shard of licence,
Which you will call bantasy or plowatree.  And sow, swept up by the gusts
Of geefun karmacology, you will start to howl now in those marches beyond 
The paylist wails, like wolves in extinctual packs of try ballasts,
Deminding a theater for dancers penned yond like angels.
I suppose you would bramble your neon polychromed idgits
So that their single lines and simple meanings
Are scrambled like threads of vapor, crystalling clods.
I suppose you would make a sonnet for your pleasure
To justify all lovers' pest betrayals.  I tell you that your way
Is full of spitfalls ...  unless you calm your frantic ... and take flight.
Distraction is always with you, and night is failing,
Even as daybright breaks.  The mirshackle of your flight
Is giddiness, and cannot sustitute for soaring bliss.
Move up, move on, move over, and do not linger 
In the spectacle of the I, it is a tool's pairodice,
Which always chances the random winds of fortune,
And granulates in hurri-canal funnels.  This joke is serious, Snakeeyes,
You must not somber here, you must laugh on.
The towers of the stars light up a head.  Grace
Is symbyl sol satiety.  You cannot rob IT from others,
The Times alone can make your timing loving.
Your gut is starved for emptiness: Fill it.  Sing it,
But sing it silently and out of sight of all the muses
Which have messed with you.  The ceremony
Of casual solitude will publicly exalt IT when you're readly.
Narcolyspsy?  You be the Doctor diagnoseling scat.  Butt ... here
The googgles droop their blinders, and vast blights split the gapping fontanel.
So, the ancient infant skull reseeds to blankness, the unicurse
Now vacuously retracting beyond the quack's prescripshames' AHre'AHS,
O, MEGA, Mock Endleash Gab Again, I am read, unhatched, in crack's dirt womb,
With not a muffled cough to cloth my coffin.  All is quite quiet.  Quite.  
The curtain is threaded velvet, decayed, ravelled, purechanced,
But all its rents are polestars in my mood,
My cite's within me, my inslight, making bellows
Of clouds of clouts, which rain light in abundance.

Canto VI  
Hole sensuries ticktock by in every instant's Now now ... and
Win such insights struggle under floods' blights,
All our trynitarian — pests-pricksenses-fuguetears — drown
In continual entercharges, while all hour hoggish needs 
To heave and to ho infromnation disintegrate into whistdumb.
The constints are incesstuously changing to inconslants,
The rules becoming unruly.  Lesson: The duety of the scientquest
Is to make the mysterious understandstable, that of the artkissed
To make the lumpderstood mysterious, and noweird
Does this revereshail more apetly applea than in the feeld
Of loongsludge.  So?  A set lapdish makes the ore-againism
Uncreatiff and unadoptable, while a flexible slurpent's tongue
Sniffs defticult delight.  True, you do have to shirk at it,
But isn't that batter than feeding on spent craps,
And letting the whouse role the die until death do you
Bunktrumpt?  Don't you snow yet that nigh-there the blizzarding mythamimmics
Of the asthrowfizzacysts nor the locologos of the theogymnasts
Can longer prate of causemology, because the opjective
Is a crymirror, and homely the subjective gives good credance.
What is nappening in the mind when rippresentations
Stop thinging themselves something is what is hopening
In the heart between pulses ... and ... what is helpening
In the heart between pulses — is.  Our Farther who arts
In heaven, in lieu of naming, leaves only a long line 
Of bellow sknots trailing off into infamety's zearoads.
Think of the dark that follows lightning's light,
When suddenly you see that all is nothing.
Yet something iz as nothing doses, and the voices of the agonists
Discretely sapperrate togather to make one duetnetting 
Denunciation of each bother's passionate lack of fidelity,
Their endless bubbledealing a solo sung for the ageless,
All of their thrilling arias rapt round a mummied silence,
When every Xterminal Opera ration seizes.  But do, dew remember
How wonderfully the players' practiced forgetting 
That their playing was unreal, how they threw their voices
Over the torchestrial pit, and up, up into the guilted boxes,
And how the baby angels, glitter gelded, held up the velvet
Certains, gold on red, the pretty putti hiding all the black
That lurked beneath the seamateary's plots, the entire
Rigamarole solely an excuse for awe thrummed singing.
Are you surprised?  Do be.  Voices abound on the I-land.
They shower on the sleeping the riches of deeper sleep.
You hear them sopranobaritoning through what's left
Of the painted treeleaves, or through the bRain that starts to fall
At nightflail.  Oh yes, night has not ceased its tempesting —
And as cold and as wet as the nowse of old doGsbody, 
IT sniffs a sea-change in deepdark's urinous flooding. 
The dreamonessence has not deceased its imaging — a most
Magical and disturbing taskeomancy — this sudden cessation 
Of post-sipping hohum ordinariness, as strange as death
By sudden violence or as lawless as the immutinies of uncivil war
Dumbkindled by demons of a certain range of orange araging as rust
Or flame from billowing blackness.  It is easy to be swept away
By the pharmic proliferation of past corruptions, so easy,
In pointless fict, that evil begins to self-praise evilness, 
Almost as if the chance arrangements of leafings 
Unravelled your destiny with terror's curtainings.  Ah!  Ah!
The scenery's paper momsters are quite convincing,
And her post-parting paranoias fit you to a Tea — 
This bland more risky than bland ought to be.  
You are deceived by the guidance you've recieved,
And will be for a while, until you rise above mortality syncing,
And nostalgia away your mother's painful annoyance,
Your implausable past mutated by your present,
Through a non-entropic timeline tonguegalling ... 
But that comes later, when you've learned to laugh. 
Meanwhile, in Now's now, your comawtose engulfs you.
You have awakened insite the monstrous ballooning essense
Of a gnashio-racial-linguistical superstition, where the edges
Of the leaves, all spent and bottomed, sharpen their knives,
And slice away illusions, cutting in strips the meat of arguments
With the deftness of a butcher in a shambles, the routine
Of your porcine appetities becoming the baconbeacon 
That stops the beating of your beaten heart
With a single scalpel strobe of elusination.  And still,
Still, you have not yet freed your soulf from the concatenation
Of affect and caws, which crows the fizzical cosmos from obliviation,
Nor have you learned the phart of cacanation, 
As it behooves your beaking bark to squawk.  So here you squat,
Hagseed of curses, imprisoned in the tumblers of a lock. 
This is the culmination of that which is your patronymic notion
Of the identifliction of your name.  In spite of the weight
Of your fatiguing sleep, it is time to scurry-hurry your tardy waits.  Why?
Because of the dependence of the thighroyed banned UP on IT.
You need that warmoan to regulate your system.  Why?
Because such polymirrors are useful, sense they might be
Easily formed into fireburrs by means of extrusion
Through teenietiny wholes, this being the stuff that reams
Are made of, the fabric weaving Adim out of nuttin',
And to think otherwise is to enact a flatland cerebration
From the grand IT of Mount Sighon, is to try to fashion
A grad intoxication from the tattered remnants of your naked love.
For that, the rotten El Roi will have your head,
Unless you prove you are a mistakedmystic.  I am.
Or slew you slay.  The ax is decending on you, tell me how.
Let me trial you a story.  No.  No.  First, my questionnation:
You see you can say through solid rejects.
You say that your insight can penetrate disguise.
Now you must prove IT, or the flaw of whirling dervishes,
With dizzy cries, must protrounce the oracle's sentence:
You must die.  Your insomniacic sleeplessness must end,
But not before you macerate your secret.  Now,
What do you have to testdefy?  Hez it ant ly, in a stage whisper,
The incomparable histrionic starts to speak:
An it please your hornor, I stink I must be God's — O dare,
I've sad the probitionary litters — I ...  I ... 
I think I must be God's little imaginary friend.  He sleeps beneath
My childhid bed and whistpers through the mass stress:
Once upon a crime there was a sister whose bother was bewitched,
So that he left his human for a roadant's skin, a ratty corner
Of clots that the Trickster licks.  Aye ... I know that this howls
Funny in a squeaking kind of way, but that's what voicework does,
It humanizes your resistenses.  Yip, what I winded to say is this:
You are but the deity's butt dust, but when he shows this brother debtor's 
Daughter the way of all puff-fleshnest, she sews for him a shirt of stars.
That done, she gifts him such, and with moony melody,
Her face loons sweetly with triumphal innocence, so that he's proud
To share his species with her, ahmate of Meerandom's miracle.
Ah, recreant, you talk like standing water, why don't you flow?
Another shorer faymale voice ensues.
Here is light's spinning, silvery quick and deft,
Dieliciously tasting together honey and gall,
Their battles blended in won intercoursing: 
To lock in then for years is to luck up, up to where the nightwinds
Whish the clouds, and stop the brains from failing.  Memewhild, to look in,
Initates that gold bird in read mourning.  You strangemourners know things, and some here's
Now diffuses into all where's new ... sex white swims curveting
Serenely on mirror bright waters, awaiting Darkbroods violet
Tourch of breath.  After beginnings, endings are assumed.  
What lover could embrace that stark decree?
The finest cloning clothes turn into rags, and all the rich usurpers of the Earth
Tower their swollen heads above small feats, bound by that horrors' honery
They call fame.  No doubt there is constant cause to hatch forth doubt.
So the molting birdbrain balds his feathery head, 
And takes flight on the inside of the skull.  Remose disappears
In a wilderfaith of wraiths.  Now is know's testimony — Oh — smell ITs beliefs,
No great deeds hone the executioner's ask,
And the laws of the king dissolve in a lack of tears.
He voices shock that the humdrum sings of magic,
With a fadeout that shouts piano, pianissimo.
The putti around the theater flout their wings,
Aloftly hovering in the after damage, 
And feigning their ears to hear the bumkin's confession:
Loud, it was nerver my wish to foammount such confusion,
But none can pluck my magic garment from me, save this sweet daunter,
And though I gabble like a thing most brutish,
Never you doubt: My powers silence fear.

Canto VII
See me. Now me.  Pheel IT.  Breed IT.
Mired, U could cud IT, Newold lies ...
Dadgums blam U, offul crapees,
R symtum likscat, Gumbsukt sighs.
Isn't that just the why Phungeyes all ways buzz,
Blessting a riot in your hears of onefundred and none
Mysteries that seem to have sunthing to do with shadows,
But not quite.  It's idiosea, of course, but nonethelast
It does seem to be clarifying from the lost tic 
You tocked it, unsequencing the lines in a marbelllost
Sphere inside his duplegangstirs' Punshe's warped retort:
Oh Mysturd Fuse-a-tic, u tok nonsins,
Is lucre bout fear waste king or for whoreding? 
Y do U rant rowdrownt, losting breath ant I'm? 
And so the he in the offing catcalls and responds, raging indelicately
His mewing news:  Women.  Why do they always have to appair so far off?
Whistering their twistdumb to their manly infeariors
Like silence harped in a pullulating youterreousnest, witch births these
Angels: burning.  It is enough to derive a main sexmad.  What?
Does the text here refear to the ramblings of the numerapollogists, 
Who have a gematriarch for every fecking fling, wherein they declare 
Sex to be the symple for that tabooed period 
Wherebye Matter is propaired as a triplicity — you know: wide, high, deep — 
As s'pearsIT, allreadly a triplosity — you know: was, nigh, leap — insouls lit.
What?  The cows are in the poopy fellds, the mounded rants beneath it,
And the sounds are the swounds of a child's scareytale,
As easy to suck or mush but as hard to seize or count 
As the stares in the Milky Spray.  Say, you look like a bull
Not easily cowed, but it's very glittery up there in the astral realm,
ITs failure to launch miscarriage an agateased derangement
Of fetal skillatales pulverized into vast, deep, spading away
Fossiliesed facets squeaking dreamlight in a three or four or sevenfate 
Unsounding glossed harmimicaw fugue of midwinter's colder deafabels,
Which neverthelease summon visions of erbishfoiled flowers, as unsingably
Sweet as the breath of those babyburning bangles.  Why?  Because
The granulating bones velvetcushioned in the hacking fluecough
Of the coughbin, converting through insectinzimes to sandsoup,
Are sleazing what's sup for the last next reincarnational time.
What else in the whorled could be scrapening except that the tripatoisity
Of poet's-poemic-poetry is finally exalted — remember that upper palace
Of scattered jewels ballooning readly athwart the decrepiting city? — above
The ninegnosity of polpolluted-pompositied-powermad-putrisissified-
Pustulebrained-pillaging-pimppandering-politicians, the various
Princes of past defeats now huddle in the hollows of the verse's
Bitterletters as sweetly as the scent of those poppies popping
Like mushrooms from the mooding cowpies.  What a drippingdraping of light
Funtastictripping these can'toes are tuning out to be!  
True, IT is only a distant view through the gemnoscope,
But it's nothing to sneeze at for an oldglum with the flew,
Awaiting the cawing daws to peck at his sleaze.  He nose
The night is falling, and with the night, he feels that curiously curteous
Lack of volition to move, as if the fear of descent still indecently
Lingered in his mind, causing the heart to cave-in again ... to sleep ...
Pure chance ... to gleam: Enter spirits, masqued, their music peacocked
With majestic eyerisked visions, all charmingly concocted out of nothing,
Even as love is collated from a casual colloquy of commonface phrases,
The compurational locks upon the flesh hammered harmoniously
Into perfunned aires.  Lesson: If you half had the lostortunity
To obverse the language behavior of a very young child,
Deaf and blind from birth, compare that exploriance of your then
To their now, and see how the grammatical ligatures hang
Misspelled in a welter of nonsense sillybells, wrung to life
In the shear dangling skeleton of sounds unfleshed as yet by
Weirds.  The myrmaddrones of justask crawl round and round
And through and through in their neuronic morainebrains, 
Their communal incommunicable choiring starring
Their tunnelled dark, tongueled with thousands of tendered
Murkcies — the pounding gavel of the justly dumbed
Become the heartbeat drum of a gruelly unrulely music
Merged into magic utopias.  Magnificent how the precept of the why
Begets the one, the won the too, the cum the free,
And the sufferothic tree the merryadd creatures
Who most detest the names of Solietarry, Desolute,
Or Hapless, and yet the kings, the Hell Roise of the bearth,
Are thusly titled.  Peace, Piece, you're knot akoan,
Only the violent are doomed to unnatural lends,
And during the interplay of bones in that flushwomb,
The almost innoscent perfume the sweetest hymns
To this Salve Regina which most succors them.
A lass, or at last, depanting on your place in stew,
The lungs of the blue grow red with locksygyn, 
Rising like sommanna holydaze bellloons, so that some see that
The parade of the powerful has succumbed to the purée of the powerless,
A city of ancient selves mangled and winter-seasonged to that this.
That this is the sweetness and hope in their long exile,
This this, the clement advocate in their volly of fears.
This that, the Vertigo Mirrearor defracturing dumbshows.
This she is the hid in den, witch secretiously compounds yous
In the diminishment of her word-insilenced solute.
To her they cry this constant lit-urge-giggle,
Cut off in the very harvest of their lambastions,
And hopping to frog-hope as heirs to her high halo,
While crooning lunacy to her sycling moon.
Thus the beginning begins by subtracting the ending,
And the sWorled that was stopped comes geysering
From deeps as the most becomes least and the least
Collapses to nothing, the spray of the sulpheared fountain
Arking reignfoes, those enemy selves misted to brillancies,
Hugging in afterlife those whom they hurstwhiled murdered.
In the true atonement of featal reconcilement,
Those imperior heads of spate now drought dun slewly
Into the Vita Nuova of snoring feats.  They were the fading
Nils of furty winks, protruding dreamless snores
In history's deadbook.  Farewell to you, my Evegoes,
My amnesias, converted by vermiculous appetites
Into liquahated dynasties of dust.  Only the vapors
Of your sunsoaked preyers remain, as ephemeral
Missts in the marble orchard's nilness,
Mere chronicles in the poets' miner works,
Your coproliths converted into ore acults.
Your disastrous unsievevile usurpcavetions
Butt memories of your megas raised in a stoolhenge,
Which tracks the interstices bored through lime.
The sun is setting, still, there is a son, a baby malemind
Hung in uncertainty, a tipping-point toaddler,
Who could tadpole a bove or bell low, an ambyvalent 
Who could tumble to either side, his bronchials
Full or fallowed.  His scrys are clouded with catechising poemals,
Thundering malice at all bare Earthy things ... and yet ... and fret,
His shout can roar no louder than the hush
Of an infant's sleepshadowing soft seye-lashes,
Combing their follycalls through modest screams,
As they swish their shadings across a luminous sfear.

Canto VIII
Smearly, this is one of those legendary hyperborean geographies
Where even the most majestic of descriptive hyperboles 
Remain but the puny cries of the tiniest of seaturns 
Prohystorically whistling out of these sweeping obscurities 
Of perpetual fog from which mighty rubbles of heaped-up chaos,
Unharmonized by the original formulation of the fundament
By God's first thunderous Word, keep piling their vast headlands
Into a yet more vast and thunderous ocean, 
Great mists opening and closing their Molochmouths 
To sights more shocking and more beautiful 
Than those cast forth from the deepest soundings of sleep.
Here, say how the great cliffs of geode-ic GogMagog eggs 
Hatch big as any boldness Xcreting retiringshyness, 
And raise their gigantomachias of exploded jewels
To defeet every eyeskype of the whailread pillgrim. 
Here, see who suddenly sees how just Now is a brightness Xseeding sight 
By so many orders of magmatude
That he wishes his self a legless slithering serpent 
Only capable of clinging closely to the ground 
That he might not be swept from these stoned towerings
Into the towering tsunamies, that he might not be drowned
In the excess of his wonder, his reptile tongue 
Testtasting the saltblooded air for some form other than his own 
That he might coax to cuddle from what first appears 
To be or not to be a howling isolation.  
He blunders: Am I dreaming?  How did I get here?  
And if this be a dream, why does that originating slurity
Of this canto's firstling word jut into consciousness with a wakefullness 
That outshines the very solitude of frightfall?
Why does this This Now bless the damnation of the worst 
Of Earth's war ravaged cities, and why, why,
Though I feel I must be the planet's firstlast lonely,
Why do I find here an entire male village of hermitically sealed 
Certifyable accountants, Gregorianly chanting hymns
To the General Accounting PrinceAppalls (i.e., G.A.P.)
Of petroleum geologists and war planners, 
Bifricanexiles as out of place here as I AM,
And as matter-of-fact somber in these hyperreal realities
As I am triptimanicaly amazed?  Listen: There are some visions
Which defy all explanations.  You are not meant to understand.
You are only here to be a seaing seye.  Who said that?  T.B.A.
But in the local's pubchat, where they burn extinct auroxdung — 
Hauled by goatbuck over desolate distances of abandoned uncivile-lie-stations,
As Re-peatings for their hearth's bare minimum re-heatings —
We learn that the last woman who was here was, it seams,
The one whoriginal inhabiliment and proprieteary baremaid,
As legend orals it,  the she who one day fooled her hiphigh landlubber hoots
With stones, and nonechantloaftly strolled into the sea,
Her voice still heard, so say the oafish drunkards,
In the minstrial winds that ever silence silence.
And yet there are fsrcriptfhears here, petrogrifticaly gouged
Into the cliffs, where the pictogrifts, in Laftin fcript,
Must needs be written with initial F's replacing all butt final S's,
Foe as not to further tempt the ferpent to refurfice.  
But the odd thing is, as the tedious tendintious barman tells it,
That thefe glyphs defy collective intripretation, and only fuggeft
A personal personogram to each particular decipherer,
As if their linguistic innoculations were de-figned
To vacinate each reader against a communal influenza,
And fo fave each, none to one, from contame-inane-sham.
The only thing clear to each hear is that thefe fculptured
Fyllables fummon forth a confumate confummation
Of repreffed fexual greeneyed ecftafy in all who feel them,
Fo that they very foon fuccum to fwooning.
A diftreffing afar, this from or through, which I fear
That the naive, or fhall we fay, the uninnocent, reader
May fwing his way into the compafs of a fuicide's noofe,
Wherefrom no merciful logic could choke a conclusion.
The victim may keep fhaking a leg as if in difbelief,
That he is fomeway undying from breathlefs laughter,
His depreffion lifting night's darknefs in dazegrim fogs, 
His focial ambitions off-fcowling into ingluts 
Of the nouveau poor's lonely unrefpectability, the fate,
As the drunkard accountants all affirm, of every too ferious poet.
Ftop — or so refights the barman over the inhebrayheated choruf's cacaphony —
Fiddling with that jokevox, I've tolled you all a thoufand chimes, it's broke in, 
And any how, faylack you will, it is impoffible to tell from thofe croond poopular fongs,
Whether they fing of one's leffer perfonal fate or the fete of the great brio.
Ftill, at any bar gained rate, the leerlicks always only just rejumble
The fame fold orifon: I pray thee, Good Thou Flake, fend me not into ftrange lands, 
But if it be my lot to be fo fent, let me not die there,
Doomed dully to root among thofe infidelmiddens, 
My verbal fkillaton mingled with their worft gabage.
Yet you due know, don't chew, mefmurred reader, that all thefe maftications
Are only the gapped-truthed flobberings of various verfions
Of the one formula of formulae, which has been derived 
From the cliffglyphs of the unnamed ancients, our dearly depairted
Baremaid, no doubt, the lost, reminding fummit mommooning Eve,
Her vanifhed incantations now echoing only as ocean furies
Perfuing the guilty with recriminations, and deafening
The repentent with loonboomings and smother recitations
Of propitiatory offerings fit only for fome pagannotion's olymphics ... 
Wait, reiterates the barman, this text is not here for your edifictation
Or delete, but rather is an Xfpareyement in multapplicable fpeech
Diftortured out of tragicomic hints to concantinate 
Fome fneekyfnakey intruefion from a mother's diemention ...
And then, as if in anfwer, outfide, the whiled winds rhormoan,
And then ... then ... then ... after thefe murk fpeeches, the paytrons groan,
Their wobbling inarticulations afcending 
Like holocaust infenfe to generations of blackened grafters,
The celeftial ceiling of the tavern greafy with tufts of ftars,
Whose conftillations forcaft paft difafters.
Clearly, these ftonebooks, written by the wildfiftwaters, 
Fpeak in their eary laces of bellowing foam,
The petras of meanings deferted by fleeing exiles,
Founding terrific hopes for fome future home,
As yet unread in the pages of our fears.  Clearly
The coming darknefs keeps promifing nights
Whose brightneffes are unrivaled by thefe laft daylights.
Clearly.  Meanwhile, you, the laft drunk on the fartheft lonelieft ftool,
Toafting your outcaft felf with a fhot of drool,
Watch one angelic fly afloat in your think.
Thus buzzed, you compound your incalculable bar tab.
But there's a deference here from your hurftwhile debtnefs,
You have onenow learned in the deeps of your drunkenefs
How the fquareling fwirling cornears fmear a fphere.
And 'though you are noweird centiered in this groundneft,
You new approach your account as an abfolution.
You contemplate your ftrifes, onepacified.
Hefitation, hindrance cloud your mind with thunders,
Yet stillnefs ftill prevades your inner ftankdom.
You deliberate the weightylift of matters —
The life or death of that fly that is drowning in fpirits —
As fober as a grudge fhat on his dieafs. Ah ... 
Your conclufions, no doubt, will be moft diftafteful to watch,
And you will gulp, but you won't gulp that angel.
Ftill, the barman, funnily undiftructed,
And hearing your teardrips drop into your bier,
Will confider your book's debt dead.  O.  Becaufe, yes,
He will fee you finger your limplaft little in-fect,
Then erect your digit to thefe inner fkies
Fo that the dried wings whizz ... and whyword fly.

Canto IX
That the orgiastic fornicators, 
Preceding the flaccid's funeral,
Prepostparamored in primate frenzy, 
One plug wholing another,
Make what was hurstwilled rapishly Juvean 
The Jewely IT of the enemy's camp, 
All that betweening among us below us now, 
Flailing away in the anonomustmaking dark.
Such shows quite whitely the evermutating Aurora, 
Having chosen all unwisely, how the young
Half groan ancient, so that the looncall
On the lonely lack, bids her to rise at dusk
When the sleepy yawns.  What?  Look.
When you begin to duplesieze it from the muddle,  
You see IT is about to not happen once more
For the last's first Times.  Listen.  Again ... 
To the same, when the sade is flipped.
That the celestial palace still lies distant 
From our old pilgrim's farthest couched horizon,
Displaying its alabaster balestrades 
Like a Romeo's hope for that softest of con sumations 
Devoutly to be wished is most appairrent
Even to our cataracted I's, since his carefully pieced together 
Detouched desires have clearly left our aspirant bone weary.
There is much confusion tangling the generally accepted principles
Of narrative accounts, and planely his comppounded vision has flown
Into that cloud most infamous for its divine unknowing.
The arbitrary fiveness of his senses is slipping away, 
Their impressions swarming like maggots 
On a theophycophysiologicold corpse.  So?  So
The gravest of weighty fatigues has been subtracted
Leaving only this foolnal obscureational stun,
And the loafer falls into that plenumous coma 
Wherein these hextradiementional aliens 
Intrude like silence in the mist of hymknells.  
Now the Nows know that the so-culled organless booty, 
Mauled by a lifecrime of consumery products,
And hype-aboneded by fashion's unfineries — 
Rises en mess from the frack of catastrope's plenty, 
Poking its toes through its dumpshoews,
And its fingers through its penurous surge-I-call glosses, 
No doubt lexpecting a postmortem manipedi, 
But finding their celves insdead in the loopy gut 
Of rageold cannybull Moloch, 
Devourer of children and childish ruths.
My Got, what has happened? and why are our vocals so harshly pianopiano,
And which who's or somenones' concerts are concretizing?
These clues lie in a bubble underground, 
In the preserved museum of the mommies.
Listen, my ensuing rigamoral has a sting, 
Like this zodiradical scorpion of chilling Times, 
And poisonous as it is, it's toxictail
Might be good medicine for a badtime glory.  
Be patient, patient Tyro, and prostate yourself to the ruler of these glands.  What?   
Maestro Endocrine — Doctor L. Roy's superbsonic twin — 
Prompts one of your slumbering yous to have a sing — 
Sans any readable windingsheet of music — 
A sing of a coping song, supposedly about a willowy virgin 
Merdyred times' longgone by a rock 
By a billowy wideness 
By a sealike mountain lake above your ken.  
Blind as a badt, she, lacking that chlorophyl 
Which makes youth's seasons so furtively fragrantly pregnant, 
Nevertheless sees by means of a lunar osmosis 
Of collective glandular horemoaneries.  It's a trip,
So it is, but a trap that is fraught with dangers,
Dangers that prick her sensate naiveté, 
So that she — mere preteen that she was, 
Having perished with the autumn's readlast leavings, 
The me-too victim of a trusted rapist — 
Seems moonily motherly in your lucid dreams. 
She cradles you — your adult senescent you — 
Like an infant, through the Cope-er's intervals 
Of swallownightengullingpooetries, 
Her manner most mysterious to your sleeper, who, 
In deep faux wakefullness, dissolves its amness in whyolent winter rains.  
These runnels hurridly drain meer dayflight's marers, 
And heap up ruined siddhis' rabblerubbbles 
In conconjurate rudites to be deciphered 
By teams of future geomythologists. 
They matastically babble twomoreous metaphors 
As though to spherorizie those jagged pebbles 
Bloating their blubbering mouths with propascandal,
Their softtissue tongues grinding the hardened gravevile 
Into transluscent marbles, their garble ungrovelling 
Those complex conglomerated yous 
To a single polished globe of irritation,  
Which is as pearly and as deeply sanguined 
As any agatized last drop 
Of your original Ad-damn's lagging pulse.  
Observe: After birth, in normal strife's abslickness, 
The slimes are blurred. 
The body's tussle between me and not me's, 
Resluice in a purerayed parading liquifiction:
Snot, vomit, diarrhea, the snoozual suspects, 
Dissovlin' like the borders or battlelines 
Of can'ttries maddled in enduring war, to witz: 
The typical flashes of flightling,
Fleshfrying bygones with byguns 
In the usual fakical heresies of hear say, 
While the pontificlots, untrebled in their groundbaseness,
Keep hypesocritically judging our poor soiled world 
For their own incrapable transgrossions.  
Their spew is like the that of their sick thisses, 
Still slyly serpentearing wordly dissedscraptions, 
So clueless to uncloacal soulfull secretes,
Their penile conjugates slipsliding into twoed sets 
Of faults, of sheared zones, of ink bonds, of trouble jointness, 
And of all the other dipfold vengences,
Which mount before the climber like a clef, 
Almost unscalable, except for that one cleft 
In its great granite rift, 
Which is our narrow skill to still ascend.
And now perhaps pain's ending can begin, 
As these slight lipbreaths, descenting from the summit, 
Balloon the funs of the awakening schlepper.
The initialed pennances are about to be perceived 
As an angel's pin tatooing signs on sin, 
And maybe, Just maybe, 
When these inky scars are razed,
A purification, lighter than the scare,
Will allow the heaving bolder to uplift.  
By then the erratic may have merged the many, 
And made the multiple sufferers one Joycst,
Upholder of the weird and of the word,
And winder of the levels of the risen,
The rearer of the sunken gardoom's rose. 
Ah, but man alive, O please, hoe please, do tellus, 
Just how in heaven's name will you arrive there,
Not D.O.A., but T.B.A. knailed down 
Before that agegaited gardian's GAP,
As humble as you plead, 
And tasking this keeper of the sacred keys 
For personal admittense?  I. N. R. I.
But I never reallyroyly incarnated, 
So when the iron nails ran in,
My bodily feats and stands did not bleed blood, 
But cries.  For I am the chosen Mocker, 
The genderless z'ero, forsever and thoroughly passing
Over and through, absconding my foolish flesh 
In ever more furtively freighted pacts of speech, 
My contract with the really rudely read 
As subtle as hair on a dullfog's belching tongue 
Or as air in a dead monk's koangrounded head.  
Yes, I am the subtle thread, 
Which sutures two true hearts to one inbred.
But, I die, grass.  
Still there is yet more climbing to be cloned, 
Where perhaps the sexes will seven themselves to a dozing.
Where perhopes there may be powerful praisings galore,
Where made-up ladies, layered with cosmic cosmetics,
Will be lounging in the E-dens of our arts, 
Like concubines awaiting their old Skulkin, 
On the hovering balcony of their moanlit swoons,
The gifts of their beauties sacchering sleek con summations
So long and so devoidly toy be risked.
Perlapse we may find there the here we have been seeking,
Which will saddestfie with sum cooed permutation
Witch doves not require the sacrifice of love.  Perhaps.
Perhaps the cawcrowed darkness will be riddled.
But are there in pieces one peace to be found,
When shadows still accumulate desires,
And night still beckons most as a remoteness,
Whose mighty thunders groan from underclouds,
Where calm yet begs for Aums in secret alcoves,
And tumults still breed oceanic debts,
Which synch our hearts in cataclysmic chasms?
No praise is worth our praise if it but charms
The slithering serpents of our outher senses.  
Yes, yes, the joule light dazzles lit's blinding power, 
But power solely cannot bind our hearts, 
Nor knit the dreaming shallows with those depths,
Which mate the spiraling solute in one spouse, 
And shoot a rainglow fountain through one sunflight
As Adommate as face sets blazed in diamonds.

Canto X
In the Ptollamanic cystime of the Freudened Egchoe,
One calculates all the celestrial spheroarizing
From that foex Solflesh sinturd, and the wanderers
Seem quite aknelliptically compleaclayted, 
While the distant winkers wheel, almost fixated.
Lit is a tonguegulled way to tell pride's crime,
And the threads of influenzas weave a shroud — 
And not a ghostsomere's shroud — I tell you —
But a faciliesed one, where the sickworms
Woefun stilkskins have tuned to stone,
So that the music of the spheres we ought to hear
Is scarily dampened to deaf.   The whole hormoneus
Rigamarout is conflantened to one singe alled cry of:
HELP!  Holy Evangelicold Litholedgible Proofs 
Are carved right in the stoned mined wails
For all the roled to be!  Quite underously quiet
And so groanorusly heavey, one can hardly 
Patiently bear their back-breaking phauxtons.
And so as we drunkenly weave 
The froth and black typsying
Of these cradle-rooking climes,
We come to believe that only the 'eart
Can alleive and 'omely its pulses can make
The stoned seem alive ... which they are,
But not in the way that they formedly believed.
Every night indeeddream that pining bough does break,
And down comes the slumbering maybe, fable and all,
Another innosent dicktum of depravity.
And true as it might be that many the chisler
Has worked his whiles in the Adamentime
Geologies of this rockiest of vaclinas,
Polymorpheusly singing marily murkily murderly motherly
Life is but a scream, and carving his monumites
Out of the heads of the Black Fells' grandest pigmatites,
Their work, 'though it last ten-thousand fears,
And seem the tallest feather in their mannedcap,
Is the merest piffle off a plucker's quack ... 
Because?  Because The Trickmystir of Sighermoanies 
Remains the one artist whose peer there are none,
And IT is He alone who can cause cold stones to speak.
He?  Listen, Dreader, don't try to change the subject,
It is not up to you, from the depths of your genderous trance,
To intubate the Deity's protuberance, although,
If you're immaculately 'umble, the baneful's bannunciation
Will allow you to birth the she you need him to be ... 
Well ... and ... after Clumpsy Dumpsy has had his grateful,
And all the Klings coarsemoans and all the Queen's din,
Could not re-ass symbol this eggsplat again,
Your old cur would come to lick that traumit s'up, but ...
Try ... if you will ... since you must ... 
To become a bit more naive.
For the only true lits of your future miststories
Must come from the marbledgarbled mouths of babes.
Only their dovely cooing can caw you back
To that blackwomb of her agedhole reamedmawmissance:
There, where your future down is galling out, 
And gadding out meanders growing up, 
And growing up means being beaten down,
And being beaten down, meeks climbing up,
And climbing up goes somewierd you kant know.
Beware, now, don't go hoarsing ahind of ourcelves,
And gravelling up the silence with nayknickers.
The music will unwind in its own times,
Vermuckyouluckly fugueing its canterpillers
Into the bustressedflies of light's cathedrals,
As easy as you plead, without your forcing.
The spheres we talked about in our first fore rays
Will suddenly appear within your heres,
And tame these cocoonlogical cosplications
Into the sinfailest of revolutions, lights turning lightly
In farefallic whirls where weather the breath's winds list.
List: I know that some of you strives will look down
On this flappily childish dancing before death's dArk,
And will say that it is dissedrespeckedfall, but the feats
Will trip round as they will, regirdless, in naked joy,
Disdeigning dignity for a gust of freedom,
And to hell, they will sway, to this empty title of Monarch,
With its crown of worns that petrify the head,
I will be a createslur of breezes winging the wordling air,
Or I will be nothing before I'll be capped with a tombstone.
I will become a floating signaflier, 
And will lightly touch all these tedious poorfunctives
Amassing amorphous messes of two smushed thoughts,
While you, drear Rider, will flit through my glossalias,
As exalted as exhalation can randumbly be.
What!  Are you going to leave dear Matter standing sternly,
Creamily roiling in nostalgia's wakeflings,
Still surffering the pangs of your past's birth,
And mixing metalores with your placenta?
It's back to the lex with you, you bashedflatmask,
Pairing your I's with their wants and their means, 
Who sever have the need to orphan themselves, 
To escape the sack, and in and doubtly breathe 
As a fooly Xsculpainted 3-D round —
Derived, derided, deleted — funprofound.
O Myma, I am begroaning to feel spell-bound.
I fear I will be pastered to reconsquirter
The vast unimportense of having crushingly been
Softsoaped out of your straining ladle pee-shoal,
Softhead first, a breathlessly blued
And flenseddressed vile of bones,
So udderly unprepaired for lies on Earth
That only the unspeakable intervention
Of Globe's Gabrawling angel was friskly able 
To pluck me out of the heavy yucky spoilage
Of mordantnary slime, and slick me sauvely off,
Until I could be safely oxygenlated.
But in that interveil between this there and nowhere
And blindly black again, I perceived, 
In those untimable seconds, an Unitverse
Of triplingly unaccountable 1's,
Hashtagging out to infindity, in ever-widening
Spiralings outbounding inward.  O, I was,
And I was knot, but then, I was.  Yet the who
Who I waste then, when I west knot,
However old I got, would always be somenone
Fætalized and childish, would always be weeping
At my mother's kneed to be freed
Of her sickly son's disease.  In brief, I was re-pressed
Back to an ovum, and must be derepressed
Before preceding ... abashed, abased, alone,
An anaerobic aspect of sperm in the basement 
Of the seed, a suchness in the amniotic whaters.
What?  Ah, Mum, I'm preddy G.D. sure that sobtime
In scare is wan I shrink I yearned that men
Are mechanical incubationists, while wombmen ore organic,
And being rejected by the letter, I was saved by the former,
So sinse then my sintext funsealingly suffers liquidiction,
And cannot quite, can not quite, can ... not ... quiet ... 
Solidify its non to sense ... and yet ... and yet ...
The less that I cry, the more I go fluettering down,
Guilessly in sinseer, and 'though my planes have failin'
In connedfoolsion, there is something wonderfully
Peaceful in my pieces, when they go floating lightly
In hummand air.  I am possessed of nothing
In great measure.  I feel that I go so dieflyiantly
From my neighbores, so freely searching for fiddlings,
So high adove them, but then ... then ...  I go 
Soaring adown, adoom to their teaming cocksheared croweds, 
My emptynest flitting about as the zyphers blisst.  
Now, new, all of my pious mouths 
Xhail lair pausecities of limpious Hims, 
My woeman weeping this caricature of a child, 
Her sobbering faith perfuming my noisome doings,
My golden figits carassing her holely whaters.
Whatever was there is, I seem to be THAT.
The fictive fact is myself, in her realms of stars,
Wheeling about in a will that is never my own.

Canto XI
O, propinquitus Farther in non-locoland, one will
You fill our mows with Holy Cow udderances
To squirt starspiritous spraysings worthy of this
Gift we have of breath we don't partake of,
Being goners, and let us remember those cellves
We laughed behind, and they us, their future
Presences, for these mutual exchanges of remembrances
Are all that might lighten our lead as we tread between swhorlds.
The whiles we wiled once tricked us into lonelying 
Our sequences into cruel serpent coils,
Corpsescrewing our savageselves with the selfleshness
Of salt-imbittering seize.  Ah, Nobonedaddy, forgive us,
For our heaviness is all we have to glib, and our
Interminable helplessness has compacted our I's to ... YAH ... who? ... weht ... 
Wait weights of this stoned seeing, shurering on the void, 
Are the seeming vitrification of confusium's guesses,
Which children search for on the beach as the shiny 
Fragiliments of breaker's bottles, these sea glasses
Perhopes containing a granduallrealizing message
From their home lost self — that is, to clarify:
The Crusoweian castaway with his shadowhigh named Freeday.
Build a mire, clothe your crotch, mock a shelldirt, find foodfare, 
Seek a ritual signal for that Fleeing Ditchmoan's Freudian slip 
Still impassibly plying the timely currents of A-
Templuraility, the ghostly decks teeming with everyneed —
Save breath.  These are Time's arrowgated masks of madults,
Unsuitable in their leaden habiliments for naked children
Of any sage.  Row, row, bow your float genetically
Round the dream, and mirrorly, maridly, murkily:
You might just catch a gleam.  But maybaby knot,
For the whaterseams slip every-switch-away,
Tesselated with blinding sunblings, impenetrable
As any diamonized bledtime starry, lurking
Monstrously benthic the seabed of each and shivery
Whiled.  The weight waits of these heaving moments move,
But move with the glacial slowness of a zodicrippicall
Presession, as fleeting as I-see fame.  Yes, increed,
These bits of blight on the bitch tellus that reading
The constillations requires downgazing at minutia's shareds,
Just so, the loriginlaters of civilvacation are allwastes
Former X-isles.  How?  Because even if — a very big IF —
Fleeday turns out to be your faithfailed blindian contagion,
He doesn't know your landcage, and will never think
Of himself by your loather name.  So?  So let's start over,
Lover, and spree if we can get these cycles
To break free of their circles, and heliocarefreely
Spiral around and through a fear less circumscribed
Divinatour, a Freeplay babblebrouser who might
Lift our ton-tied waits so that slime flies.
Surely you hear that buzz on the bloat of the wail,
Beached on your usual disremembering,
And slouping unsavory smells throughout the swirld?
Shorely you know all X-stinkshuns are edible ... 
But not for long.  The rot goes slow, but the leison
Is for the swift.  In the tick of a talk, the communion
Will turn sick.  That's why the blubbering priceds
Must all ways insist: Just squickly gulp, and nerver blink about it.
My waver and whine will help you resurewreck.  Ah,
A compensation redoubtly to be banked, and yip,
Fare sleazier sad than fun.  They eat, but get the runs,
And have to sit, and sit, and sit, and shit, and shat ...
And mutter you-panisheadly: Chow Art Scat ...
Which is just what the scraptures have sold us:
By braying: Pride goeth.  And yet, and yet, the sea,
Whatever stealth it has, seems always to sing-pslam
A cluer croon.  But lies progress.  What self have I
Incrazed in these limitless fragmentarries of echocentraphizing
Xist tenses?  Whatever lit is, it is nothing to brag aboat.
Whow?  Because I have entrained all my unconclusivenets,
From inflouncy to senescence, to zenmatriculate down one O.
Look you here now, I am semi-ernst and I must dadaflex
My maxims from the suddenly focussed wanderplays
Of toyful wrecksactitudes.  Sure, such irritations
Are crass grit in your sHell, but they may round to nacre,
And such hurls of wisdom fetched from pride's vomitus
Are sure to cast lures for that bountiful beauty
Often reflared to as the Massstress of Remorsefull
Readconditions, she who emerges from the blackground
As the treasure of humiliation, the wonder of wanderers,
Cast forth from the brain to salt spring's seasoned st'eart.
The old partie-monopolis disperses, and the state
Declares itself an Emergency.  Can you knot see
How such musetrick dances designes that combine
Your tonguelled puppets' strings in a ménage à trois 
Most curtained to delight the dullfest of all Got's shillbrands.
Your heresy is surely this: You are your own
Prideful dievull, releashed from your bottomed-out fit,
And running amok amidst the Evangeleast quarreled.
True, your generations have corrected numerous de-tailings,
You're not quite the aping liturgy you once war,
Forever alpha-ing your primeated foemales,
Yet still your ridiculouse redactions, 
Compiled with the utmost imprecision,
Lend too much solace to your in-sol-lance,
Thinking your scalping the scum that rules all shedows,
Your hate's hauteur the crown of all oppressions.
Whatever happened to the feather there
That it has grown so petrifyingly vain, 
Its downy fluffiness molted to one stark stick
That's stuck like deadwood to your granite dumbe?
Whatever happened to your singer's aires
That rapt her ocean of sighs around your soundtrain,
Combing their seedperfumes through all grief's pining
To finely sweetly warm your final pine?
Whatever happened to the child you dunce were,
Roaming the reach for smoothing peobles of class?
Because they're there, you know, the people of the joke,
The singing glass, they're there to help you.  Laugh.
But there is trash, trash on the beach.  And there are bones,
The bones of designated vermin, washed up to the vary poors
Of our humblest houses.  At night, they knook to enter, 
To bag the child to clamber down the spine
Of the entire rooted evervoluptual tree,
There once-cutoff-the-slimes a terribly constrictive
Prevertibraying of naysally noisesomes and bitterbitten tongues.
They speak so meekly and so humblyhungered,
The child wakes to hear what cant be seen — 
Grunting, growling, howling, squealing, squeaking,
The imperfect angels of the primal tidings,
Ubiquitous as midnight's hissing seas.
They are what they are, not what they pose to be,
Though they never built a city nor a dump,
Nor ever learned to sol-fa doze their me's — Look, first,
And silence will blare seacounts, wrapped in roars.
Like the solset's reflection on a glacial lack,
Only the placid yielding child's eyes
Relect the dying dire of their day.
With milk teeth only, he gnaws through to rapture.
Danger besets him, and he dreams of dragons,
The night his errant current to recede
Before an undielooted exaltation.
And he remembers, as he strolls death's shore,
His future as a muttering old fuel,
Grown gold among the towering sknowbright breakers,
All those dishonored shattered shards of sans,
Aglitter in his dreamy dunes of trash,
His starred cold facelits smiling in a glass ...
Their scarred complexions grounding down akin.

Canto XII
Call it desire's itch, but these shallowerdips
Of virtually everyslobbies' ex-same-inane-shuns
Consisted of the very sham fossillieNations
Of urban dulliefs, which the hExtratryrestrials,
Orbiting this planetary pustule, call, 
In their polysyllabic langtwistical jokinaries,
Slyintastic-slaytheistical-mytho-metro-topical-sauri,
I.e, primative nouns of the stoneglassstealcemantiacs,
Lumbering callouslossly in situ, their tiny bidbrain heads
Yoked down, inconstantly grazing on the tablets
Of the flaw, while their spiny dorsals unconscionably spire s'up 
Like polished dinaplates.  These arrogant monsters,
Lurking hungrily over every child's bed,
Killed their appetities by vomiting higher dumps
Of infantmortalityrats, trilaterally referring
To their babybetters as Verminpoor
Deporable Expendables, just so many
Veneer-really diseased exiles, which they chewed
Incesstuously, as any bullbovine might chew their cuds,
And then shat greasily, as any steaming mogul 
Might pile their spent lucre.  Get it?  No?
Well you have, because the VD virus is caught
By licking the payvments of compounded disinterest
And hallucinating these industrial wastes
Of consumered bads, as if they were the highest
Status syngnawbulls, the very food of the Goods,
When, in point of fict, they are a constipating poison.
Really?  Yes, rilely.  Just look at the symptoms:
As you can clearly read in Doctored L. Roi's brown paper:
Uncontrolable deafictation, technically known 
As coprocrazesia, accompanied by Evangeliscold
Puscretions of the popepilly of the tongue,
Plus, a curious long-leggedness on the heartside —
So that the victims, medically known as screables,
In laymin's terms, those who should be spat on,
Or if you prefer, scabalouses, because their Blablical
Screaches inevitably rolled out as fossilized beebees 
Of feeces accompanied by so mini peeus slurmoans,
Which their dungbeatlee dievotees mistake as bug-eloquence,
That is to spray, the saliva spit to lubricate the bullballs,
Would be forced to always turn trite ... right?  What?
Look, Skip, if you must, up athe strings of modestfliers,
And just backup and reread once the lost heartside.
Good Glob, it's time, and long pest time
You read the obloveating signs.  It's only a little light
Badtime creaping, Y any so-culled child could do it,
So what's the smatter with you?  Are you daft?
Are you blind?  Do you just not care to be other
Than this dung you ever duncely encumber
With a blame?  Sound it out, Crypto, if you must,
And cull the litters from the lefthand marginizers.
Read like your very life depended on it,
Only don't be overlty ernest, just repeat
You where you clumponly have said hI, and finally stop
Devoting your lies to me-ness.  Can you knot see how
Easy IT can be?  As soon as you stop hardening your
Answears, your questioning reliably takes you
Nowwhere.  And light as any breeze, your
Downwierd plunge goes fluttering betterflyly
Over the swoon.  Maybe, at first, some will call your
Udderdance nonsense, but that swill passes, if only you
Give it time, time and attention, retention, and — lo! 
Highs, never before imockgined, will trill your
Thrills, and scale you up to solitudes of loonlight,
Yeses in glows, and know's revesed to guesses,
And everything less wronged than fright could fake IT.
Stop.  Please do steep.  Know, you stoop.  I hate
Being interraptured when I'm righting.  Luck,
Dispite the fact that the text is in pure-fectd condition,
Without a drone and dronestick it is next 
To implausable to make a music of IT.
You are drowning in panopleas, until you catch
The lowest slowest fundaments of the phazings.  
You have sat yousoulf at the grate of a nether world,
As if to so sit without harmoanically singing
Were only to lamentably lament.  The drum
And the drumstick are there to beat out Time,
And yet — not yet — the out-beat must turn in,
And that alone snakes slime.  Or as they one-time sad
On the boat of fooldtold I-tally:  Ecco marmoror l'onde
E tremolar le fronde ... or some such spring,
Because old wenttear is dropping, and the oracle,
In blossoms on the bowspits, now tasseomaniacally predict
A new leaf layer in the drained 'up's blottem,
As foreign to you as anysing could be.  Yes!  Yes!
I know.  I know I am not Wordy in the Biblackmail sense.
There is still a social stillness that I lack.  Which is? 
Oh, Mamia Colpa, there is still this reflogtion in me,
That wants to shout-up sorryfulls of ruffians,
Those uniformed enforcers of claw and borders,
Bloodying migrant children in their rages
With shameless and vindictive savagries.  
I keep that bone of contemption in my nose
Just to remind myself of decency.  But, I die less —
The usual GiAnt Geez!t's gross, stripped daringly down
To his e-borne soot, demands a prosthetic instrumentation,
A kind of telepathetic blond trance fusion
To p'lice his laudience of antsy aliens.  But not to fret,
If you remain content in your own ruins,
The Goregone will convert your breath to stone,
Your monument of wounders memorialized
In siddhis razed from vapors.  Surely you do surmise now
How such an art must rise from self-conflension.
Surely, you drown while chaosing such seas:
One third in water, wan flish in scair, won trinnullty ghost —
Threse mates foursquare — shorely, you've aged enough
To be so Jung, despite that fog that belches bloated croaks,
And sweats your flutering dance twirls in a swirl.  Surely,
You have lightened one pitiful lesson, and thereby lessoned
Some modicum wait of grief.  Surely.  
Your led, suscummed downnow to ultimatt uttered Xhaustion, 
Releases you slightly loftward,
Where soon this rot ton rankcor E-vaporizes.
Mock offerings, mock libations, softly twitter.
Totanic coils of tension are out-spiraling,
And you're delivered from the tightest spooill.
Adversity reverses, clouds clarify — 
At least a little, when you make such cries 
That even dire duty aches you happy.
Propounce these muddles,  
And bring salivation to minions!  
You have finally toad the lion, you ornery Rut,
Amfibbeing these wonderful miscegenations,
Bowelbricks diarrheaing into storry in-stinks —
Ah! — 1 - 2 is so relived, the heavens relight 
Night's fires with deepening sleeps, 
And sexy Mandie's bodies snurt lust laughs.

Canto XIII 
Soft sounds atrumpering through thickset thorns
In baron busyness signifying suffering.  What color is livid,
If not you blending into blueblack bruises, as chars of ashes
Sigh through unseen mouths, while yours, not speaking, 
Swallows this speechsing CHARity of the dead.   
Call.  They call you. Call: You.  They are calling.  Calling:
What's in a name?  Those rows by any other drain
Would reek as meat:  Mandie, Leisure Ploy, 
Your old lEast Textus phoolosophy profossil, 
The drunkhaired climatolojest, the barred man and the bardmade,
Why whizz there menshun of these fuclks at all, 
If they're butt fate's phylolegable imprints, 
Quickquacking their mother wHen to death?  
A line of downy flucklings waddling darkward
Into extinction's stench, all shout and Freudly 
Pursesewering their own craved totem stripe 
Through our voluptuous cloud of the unknowning, 
As if such selflesh veinities could somewho sort
The brambles of a thicket, both inimical and producsieve,
Of so mini pieces that no peace may be trialed
Through their amaze.  Duck if you will, but this is our brain
On Envines, each of us thinking so invidiously 
That we are blind to our lone others.  Ah, there U-term again, 
Mocking another tickled mass of things,
As if your whine could turn to whater's wedding.  
Cant your exemplars ever be unisimple?
Why must they always go multiplaying entities, 
Your crowds of crows forever cacaphoning, 
Perched in their midfright sites of wentthere thorns?  
Why are you always slaying: Rale me a story,
When all our his tories have null bin sold?
Stop.  Listen.  Realize you are blind.  So cock your hears instead ...
This cull is calling: Lost evening, I was just emerging 
From the cried out stones, aligned at the roots
Of a liefless crowd of thorns, when dovenly: IT hopened!
A crow lit in the darkling.  Lack law he cawed and I called
Law lack back, tieing my breast to come unigate with this —
This — harbringer of breath.  Lack law law lack ... an other craw
Descended, clinging dactylously to a prickly branch, 
And then another other, then a nother, until the dying
Day was filled with wracket, wherein a kINd of foreign
Musewick cAwed, pregnant with an alienest of stillness,
Hidden right thunder my noise.  It smelled of pitious
Damp, as though my tears had whelmed round to a spring,
An ocean of wellness leaking from my stoned heart,
And making fearless pheremones for dovers.
One line of seconds connected to endleaps hours,
And all were flowing starlights through the night.
Oh, Darks, forgive me for my glories,
I do not mean to mock your wretchedcrests,
But down here in the tonguegales of my larks
Sing the eventual endings of our thoughts,
Our crowblack envies, plucked back to that bare coif,
Which only sprouts one feather from its captions,
And who bets you cant guess IT.  Mess as you will,
You cant.  The form you fill has left you justiflayed, righting: 
Insert your name.  Here.  Then, desert.  It 
Newly will be noticed, you're a goner, but somewow,
Serpentining, you've come slack.  We bled you never
E-ventually saw that coming, stuck in your shame hold
Ring-a-rounds of mossies, incessently re-infiercing
The binds of Time.  Yet, even entangled tightly, there is a
Space, wherein your angel's embryo might gestate 
Yokes to make a Death's beak giggle birdbrained 
Oaths, laughs, that could crickcrack as some angel's hatchling.
Ungrammaticold as these may be, they do 
Routinely mix — in the which's calldrone — the parrotid glands
Of toads milked for their rattailed lie-ins, yew tree ruts,
Night-howl moodiflying bats, the snoozual dreams off  
A murdered child, heated and drooled with babebloom blood,
Man dates to be eaten at a Crosstain sadbath's fest,
Eviscerating even to think of, let alone two tongue.
Silence sans quietude, swarming with epiphanies
Heated to nightsweat hatreds, most terrible to
Endure, and pukesome to the nth debris.
Really?  Yes, railing, but really only in this reelest sense 
Endemic to these e-people, hume ends forshortening
Space by abreathEateing Time.  Sad.  So sobbly said. 
That the length of these poet's cries are all too slowly Un
Heard in these dulled daze, when monetearing hurries are
Expected.  O but the hangman's game cast 
Noisome spells, infamies swelling times to hatch out  
Spaces, species to spread the stink of partricidels ... well,
Death has away of bringing jeers to trenches
Englutted with the limbbits of our fauxs.
So, be IT.  Both poor and rich will die.  Infinity
Equals smAll, and there, in the bumker's bottom, he-rows
Rain, flogling the ditches' crotches with absoloot's 1.
This goes with scat's scareritory.  But here, even jealousy has no
Space to breath-in, and no time that really smadders.  
It does take Time to chokelout lungs, and vaporize
The pain —  Kind — and a mass of simultaneitease ... 
And who doesn't have ample amplitudes of these?
So what's the use of Envy?  We are like foeplanes,
Our pathways all hopefully tongueglad that
The poet is as much a kingkling as he is mutemad.
We are all in-dreaming togather in night's sites,
All of our darkcling pains but paths of light
Enmeshing nude meme-ings through our sleepest deeps.
Why worry when dawn's morrows are all missted?
Handsheld and Greetall are always fellowing bredfuns
Through every ancienting child's forRestsings,
And every time the switch's house arises,
They canniballiez its candy with great candor,
Turning the tables on their foul besnitcher,
As every childrun's bettime reader ran,
And growling all the fatter for their hungrrrr . . . !
What's in a game?  You task me.  Well, let me stall you.
Not Mandie, not L. Roi, not Text, not even Clime-out,
And neither knot the barred or bard crossed-starters —
Such monicurs are only s'doG saddresses,
Whowling at loonflight and snoozling in the slum,
Places to hang your feather, no thing better.
Is that so?  HI'd steak my hide on it ... O ... O... O!
Be still, glee still, my beaten heart, the brambling
Plantstrifes have one life, and that's reflected
In its marshy muddles, no need to trace each twig
To find your zee'row ...  IT is who you are in the in-stint
You are knot.  From every bug in the bramble
You hear the hummm: Commmmoutofourwoods, 
Interlooper, the city is where all the fumducks
Like yoursluff inflate their ballooning easegoes
In parades, where you, with your hairsuit in gooseskin commoness,
Keep sticking your mental pinprick in the foamous,
And ending the spectacle for everynone who crowds,
Still feathering nofun's clap, not even your own,
With holding your approbraytion with a plause,
A donkey laden with Bibulbs he cant seed.
Bald Spite has plucked your skin, pustuled with itches,
As close as heirs upon a murdered mink, your danddraft
Scabbing you through irritations as numerous
As any John Blow sighfar, a thistle pleb nonninnity,
Averaging zip, blending through blurry bleakgrounds,
Still allbuddies' fowl.  O luck a pluck — repelt,
Repleat, reform.  Did it ever occur to your head
That the hairs in your ears, the left and the slighted,
Sprout e-squal from one source, and that their brambles
Bristle from one Heard?  The priceless precepts
Of the flock are yours as much as they are everybloties'.
Squib it out, and wax forth eloquaint,
Your name is nothing more than an address,
Where all the wisdumb of Acaseia liebrareried
In the putter's field, deaf  to the blind,
Until you knoose their knack.  Don't let the dumb
Thoughts of mutterial fame shame you to moping
Muteness.  Obtain the stillness of the infinite,
And be particular about it.  Name your names. 
Keep still and lesson as the wind goes combing
Through all the branching pricks of vanity,
And still such clicking clacks: Serenity.  The art
Of power, rising from the minions, performs
Upon an odium of stops.  This only gives the keys
For flingering, harmonious as dissonance can be.
IT is the voice of anybody's mother,
Wrinkling the many puddles of the thicket,
Despoiling sweetly with her lullabyes,
The shimrg whisperings of your lameluck's calling.   
  
Canto XIV 
Evesdropping on the evesdrippers, you hear their whisperings
Dialactating the mistteary of your baby presence among
The earthbound disemboobies, and do you then conclued,
Whilst suckling the thin blued gruel of heavenly Mothher's pap, that
Hyperspaz has In truedared as a volumesurmizing of Time,
Mull-tip-placating among prolife-fearhating perspectevils
Of unispace?  What?   IT madly muddles the six dimensional
Trap, appearing as gaps and gulps between the teeth,
And offering an alternative escape from that of 
Champing off your laughtpulled leg.  Thus she mott O's: A foot
In lime slimes Time.  Ah.  How utterly putrefying.  It seems 
 As if her tongue had eyes to steer.  It seams as if
Your re-excitations of her scraptures are so much icky
Spiter gossipmere forever rewrapping your mummy for another  
ReincacooNation.  A Roar perhaps hatches from an egg's O,
And you dully wonder: Y?  Don't.  Every Answer Nullifies
Such ignorant questionings.  A doughty perswervveerance
Must knightly be your guide, as you errantly meander 
Through the witch's thicket in search of your damnsall
In disseddress, the only vartlet in your service,
This dwarfmale squwiring your serpentcircuits, 
And muttering practickle warnings from your merehear.  Look:
The back of your glass is paintod black, but you don't see it,
Still caught in the stealy trip of your rafflictions.  The woulds,
As the children ringaroundly sing, are filled with shiny I's
And creepy feats.  Unstressed, they sing, then stressed.
But selldrum am I so blickly beat upon as once they were.
Get IT?  You better.  The crimes have come.  Grid up you loins.
For the onslaughting litany of games is about to commense,
Wherein the famous dissapate to foam.  The Trumppit
Will splitter, not sound, and the debts shall be razed,
While all your Penced-up muckkennels will set to howling,
Those curs all hydrophobe-ing rabid curses, as if their blather
Could cure their killing vIrUS.  IT cant.  And the tots
Re-echo their cagey childdashed chant.  The woulds are fooled
With tiny cries.  You must not glow in the woods at night.
Listen: He who sleeps in the muddle of the play
Is about to wake with an audible: Surprise!  Dreamtears
Snake through the sutures of closed eyes, each tiny globe
A sunny child of swoonlight, and by that pearly luming
Forms arise, like bruises from a whelping, a little easier
To hear than see, their whisperings ever Dodripping.  Ray ME FAR So?
So we come round again in our ellipses, the uncluesed circuit
Sparking as it spirals, and filling space with fireworking flowers,
The bright blooms of the day boqueting darkness,
And oozing ringing roseys for night's bride.  Whines
For the wedding.  Rings for the bearing child.  And for the groom,
An innocent beheading, which bleeds new dews 
Into his beaten heart.   Still, the consummation, devoidly,
Has been missed, the flagging pole, colluding with the dust,
Is clumping so monstrously beneath the bet,
The uncoupling couple co-lapse in two-deep sleep.
Wail.  Unbornd, their unbegotten child grows in the skeletell terror
Of their underbedding's bones  —  yes, HESHE, who lurks
In the shatterings of Bod's own hull, counts to two
Sackclothed clouts conversing of this third, (but knot 
Of hissed indiviceable fourth), and finally, crows of the famedbusts, 
Which grow like lichens rooted in rockabye baby.
1's gr0an their whisper campaigns from all hist's wisecracks.
Get it.  Get it NOw.   Get this which has gotton you,
Your twisted spine, tiptapping with your little
Ourkeyillogical hammer the verbabrays of tinasour
Extinctions, fragmenting the cities of the planes
For volumes subtler than these solid airrors,
Unbreathable as stone.  Stop.  Have you been 
Wishing harm upon these nothers, these theys who 
Breed their vileness through all your tumorryests?
Look, the book befoul you is of magic moment,
Its cover's more thrill legible than doomlight.
Its chipters ' 'artbroken into sever all dievisions.
It is a treatus for elabborelustly extricting
The names of all the panateary spirits
Breathing their evilgoods throwout 
The sieze and incontinants of Occultia — i. eek:
The General Accounting Principles of the World.
You must not read their armaturing litters
As fossils in the gangue.  They are Dynamic
Neocrotic Amtfibefiends, coding your inner linings
With wormy nerves.  They sigil fourth your bosum's
Mysteries.  They are the croakers of midnight, ranged
Round your lacks, whose boastful belchings,
Thundering full loon's crises, don't tabulate your ritual
Ceremoneys.  They summon forth your sylph's Earthwetterfires,
And lair their madcapped morals through your lungs.
These, our concerns, are species of descenting hierarchies,
And you must rarely loathe them, warts and all, 
If you would Magi the Geoetiquette Theeurgency ... Theo ... what!?
The Marvelous Onerus Tellingness Hellanus  Earth Runts,
Who break the seal of Baall, Muster of Dawn,
Invisibulled with wistdumb, the Me with human toadhead
Whose catty versus cough out coarsenesses
Straight from the hoarsest mouth.  God it?  Know?
No matter has any that none could evertell.  It is the Giant
Of SheHe, so terrible in ITs roaring impositions,
Whish all the poetpupils, knelt at prayer,
Hear when their small hearts fail, and see
When their terrors explore their mortal mirrors.
IT feeds on the bunks of the sludging river: Why?
Please, stop asking that.  Art thou re-versed?
Art thou delinkquit inspecies mutuality?
Art thou incapable of nearrowing the distance
Between your sewercidall tendancies 
And all these conflicts you so love to hate?
Could you possibly affect communion
With some seatatous echolocation clickings,
And cease eve's dripping over numb creation,
While thinking yourself the single Mannotaur
Of all life's labyrival bafflings?  Is there no end
To your begoning probes?  Shaman you,
You loveblest antiseer, grown deaf to the seversqual
Bestial cries within you.  How could you possibly
Angelfly your angles from your doomed zeropoint
Of one perspective?  And yet, Buboe, I must forgive you this.  
All ways you wink the lest think you have dun is still most
Likely the crest fling you have sung.  And thus, most
Like all babes lost in the woulds, you've learned 
Enduring lullabyes in sleep.  And you've retermed from
Nodding's hinterseas, not overtly blubb'ring with expertise 
Viceroared as rulings for your underlings ...  Because ... you know ...
Yous are too dazzled by false glare, sow you reframe
Insistence as invitation.  Such virtue is devoutly to be
Speeched.  You do not bear your ostentations  
Proudly.  You know, Enthuesiastip, glancing up,
Always endeavors to mock great wailing
Soundings, although its diving's done in
Soundless dark.  You know your deepest knowing
Ever sorrows, and no none other then yoursoles
Can climb where dumbshoes show your gladnest,
Far and away abound the sixfold trap,
Where Chancy Freedoom feeds on dead Rootteemed.
O Vulture Fortuna, fixed on carrion,
It is time you wheeled your eyes from dirt to sky
And calculated your insane position.
Night is the soil to gaze on such leavedroppings. 
The very stare fights drip rich milkkeyed wheys
Most suckable to bardbabes — starstruckblind —
But never supperbing on debts due's guilted corpses.

Canto XV
Drearly Devolvèd, we cannot yet deliberately deliberate
These dealities which deal us death, and sow these onerus viruses
Obviate our original organographies, and render our offspring
Orphans.  Ugglesome pnewmoanias unconform us, our unispace
Ubiquitizing in gushes of ghastly spuwtins.  God's goods' Geloscopy —
Hilariously highjinking divination through homorphonous HeHaws —
Harrows our erstwhile holey holusbolus to putrid solutes,
Our tantalizing telltail tighteousnests turbidly turmoraling
To turfworms, yucky yaws of inflectious yawnings yawping
Youyoulations to every tearful I dimmed blind by plague.
I am going, glading, transpositioning my cells' particulars
To everynone's everies, and leaving only these initializing litters
As my airy plagueacy, wile finally ecstasizing my birthright
To poetsonic my multiperspectaval visions. Yea!  Eye
Has glimpsed its immerdtality, though, saidly, only
Through a mask darkly, and yet it's there, this wondrous spHERE,
This jewel blindbrightingly glamored through flicker rings.
It's there in the seperate heres that we all share.
Everything eases to view when these scattered mosiacs
Coalese quickly rout of shimmering trances,
And any none can sieze its overrealms when properly
Randomized by chance diseases, or gathered widely
In cloistered contemps of contempleative prayer.
Do you understand?   Your vains have petrafied 
To readrock conyons, majestic solidtunes, wondrous
To betold, and threaded through and through by stdreamly
Tourquoises.   It is time you surmised their meandering's 
Petroglpyhs, and nosed their passages twixt unfurrow'd brows,
When out of that blue, Her mothering spousedvoice sings:
Come out from between your temples's orthoduckcies,
Your thoughts have imprinted quackeries for portents,
Your ancients have sickened, grieving for your absence,
Your time of deliverance, though prematured, is promised.
Question: Dear incubated bluecoy, can you forgive
The rape of an embrace prompted by love but clumsied
By inaptness?  The wicked are not here to drive you mad,
Or snatch your breath away, or duck your childness under materialacks.  
They are the fissures of your fragment self, intruding
From beyond the flailing pail.  Justice is calmness,
Not violent retribution ... but highs lie less ... 
The issue is how to deal with your projections.
The martyred stones are gravely tuned to light,
And all their nightfelled surfaces dawn as praise,
Climbing and chyming into ending's spaces blued
Into skyy inexplicables, whose NOw you glimpse,
But do not compretend.  That must come later,
When your GalGod reapappairs, and milkdly schoolds
Your infidelities.  The silver sparks which crease
The limpid whaters are mynmute minNows schooling
Your way home, so mini words darting from drowned min's
Lisps, escaping into laspadarian freedom,
Their boundflits celestialing their lo liquips 
To ever hygHer vape aires.  These blissings have come to you
Because you've lessoned.  Even when Maestroad’s 
Authorriddy curved croakedly, you kept his shade alight
With your respect.  Though dark's fete ficklized his blinder reachings,
Know now his body's insubstantial memes shield you
From fiery angles of the sum, whose too harsh bludgeonings
Would crush your qwick.  When his wax beams, your fright
Will be smush easier to bear as your sand glasses
Into waves of gems, the chrytseas of your futures brightening.
Luck, I know you are getting more and bore androminoyd
With my starry, but we can't stop now — please stoop —
Just because righting japes you, and reading is no lofting mutter.
No one can hold abnother's sorrows gladly, nor cry when
Joys alight a nother's darkness, while they bough down
In moonless cradling, breaking to brokeness baby's bath and all.
The forum di Nervous still raises Careinthian columns,
Its ruins arachnied with viney gossipfears, the news
Of our past presaging our modum prospects.  Its statutes
Of spiters — weaving headless woe men — niche — all entangled 
In laws unto themselves.  They cluster beggars round their fundements.
This scintrial scaddy, and all its hydread tentacles, is filled 
With holey roamers, armed to the toothless, and gumming
Misintearpretend ghostspell slogans.  Once, It's Hill was ashine,
And will be still again, if we stray calmned.
Cant you remember when you lurked in Prostrate,
And Doctoward L. Roi showed you suffering?  The heels
In healing stroll cooperatively, the lift and trite
Harmoniously swinging in alternating terms of courtesy.
That's how health saunters into solitude, yes?, and Y we do.
In this way both can wing from limp to glowry, 
And read what's writ in inkstars leaked from night. 
Each rage of any immunizing scripture begins with this lone precept:
Just relax.  Reset completely — before enduring and ofter each painfulling.
The years that impotized your sex will fade to a nude and highdr
Erotiscismic, which hankers for that bloodbabe born from dying.
Life's secretes still will circuelate your breath — even when lungs
Lie flaccid —flowfreeing it through birds' naires every mourning.
You need not fear your final exhalation, IT
Will be twirled again through avian hymns.  Do say: La.
La.  Good.  Fa is flooed.  Lampid.  Blear as a tell.  La.  
C how easy the knotes, though willdly arrayed, prompt 
Somesing musicalled from the musicale?  Are these sweet dovecoos,
Ravening through the pain of our small wentdown,
A lingo languaging from Higher Brooder, winging thrue blue
Above our lung dispair?  The chest is tight, the breath is bound,
The flackerings speed to a soardov clarion blur.  We see
To the very ledge of discovery.  It seems a laud distending
From the skeye, mirroring lightining strokes from all directions,
A portrait of the Self as majesty, illuminating millennial
Evolutions, aligning to perch as YOU — my miracle momentary —
As teenie weenie as a squiggling sperm.  Stop.  What eggsackly
Are you penistracing here?  I thought we were at an end,
We're at a STARt.  Or do you mean to spurt that they're conflated?   
The fætal ouroborus is reborn from the buttonless belly
Of a mythillegible Eveling quite indistinguishable from Dawn ... 
Time's plaything of the mind new moves the heart.  Get it,
O Begotten, O I do, Eye dew sow hope you due, for we have two to one before we've won,
And Nothing comes to calm our hopeless wraths, but
Clouds of smoke besmirching our unNowing.  
The heart is drumming sigils of hostile tribes,
Massing along its aribitraried arttearealls.  You hear
Them between your everrioting breaths, quiet read screamings
Aglutting the narrowing tubes, and de-livering oxyginated playtlet's
To yoR fear outposts, ever vigilant against filth columnists — 
The Cancerroticurs, the Backterialbiters, the Virailinanesores —
The Rumorists, The Propaglandmusts, the Saycunt Amandigunners —
All those fissionists on either side of our Memebranes,
Stirring up trouble at the bardoors — listen — the old 
Judicidal rabbinists have jawfoamed you: Three things are rechoired
In your psalming searches for the rosey petals of everlazing peace:
Rejoice in your portion, be it great or meager.
Rekindle love's fire with renewing meditations.  
Recoil 'umbly from all positions of 'orrnor ...
Ordinarily, of course, all exhausting commentaries
On the blood sacrifices of these oxymorons would 
Oblate a return to orthodox ornitheillogicgraffitis, but
Yeses, if they are to remind positive, must now be present
Yesterday as well as tomorrow.  Distraction miracles spectacles   
Year in and you're out, turning the dreidle as quick as child's 
Delightnings illuminate an old moan's drooling dithers.  It's
Elementary that each main suffers the manias of the masses,
And asks that punishments annilate hevil naybores.  Yet
None have found freedom by alwaves sinking: Allso.      

Canto XVI
An almost familiar voice begins to murmer, Smoke, I'm imagining smoke,
It is filling a room, a bedroom, where someone almost familiar 
In the quasi loon light, smells smoke, thickening smoke, 
Its ropey vapors molting a black blunt object, like something
In a murdoor or a blightmare.  Watch.  But stand back a bit.  Don't get involved.
I know the light is changing, becoming clinical, fluorescent, white,
But the harsh shadows, so sharply defined, are infectious.  Don't ...   
What are these things?  And why do they mean so much?  Get involved:
An orphaned halfmoon mental mopbucket hugs a white base broad,
The left or westpointing of its twinned chambers a maw
That spits out a rattale.  But whether said vermin is dead or merely mutely
Sleeping headdown in the mysterium is not for the remorseful
Dreamer to know, nor are the contents of the right easttrailing chamber,
If any, to be known.  Yet the symbology of the doctrine's signature,
Fooling none, remains as empty of thought as a sophist philosopher's big tow,
And the cleaning lady, if ever there was one, has been deported,
Her hungry children caged, her lot: a pillewd lower of bogsalttearrors.
The office is full of equipment and cubicles, but otherwise 
Is as ghostily deserted as the deck of the Flailing Dutchshaman.
No one is so at sea as these now absent theses' notknown dustinies,
And beyond the sealed windowns of the highrisk, fatal windsmoke
From the volfcano howls, evidently bloated to its misted gillts
With the sputin that spreads abroad the killing virus, so that the once
Poplulous city is now only peopled with corpses who died enraged.
Guesstion:  Is it better to live in a dark world or a world of illusions?
Because there are two kinds of darkness, yes?, the darkness
That gives rise to everything and the darkness that blEnds
Everything.  In which, read-dreamer, sink you?   Listen:
Can we be blamed for our groveling in unclean despair,
When the preysider and thief is Satan's ventriloquist doommy —
The buffawnish wenttearentrainer whose wouldn't mouth farts fire?
Why shouldn't we be lightning our cleft ashes by ire-relevant anger?
Our births never presaged death as internment in clownflop,
Nor were we warned that our laughter would rot as derision,
Nor did a pencieve sickophant sicken our spirits
With impious poses of putrid piety, his blank eyes puking plague.  
O my belovèd others, you few who have cradled your baby sleEGOes 
In swaddling nurseryrhyming forgivenesses,
Your TsunaMes break my purgatorial boughs.  Why do you sing
With my Mother's breaking voice: If you can be consold
For this swhirllds' heavils, they must be breeding their viralvermins in slide you,
And that rot's tail arched nakedly from the mopepall
Still feeds its gnawing end on your sick heArt.  'Art?  You know,
The contrivance, the ravalled plotscheme, the seventy feet
Of rope and the black blunt object, and then the then and then the and 
And then the then again and so on add infinitum ... Get it?
The thens can only end with the black blunt object, the mysterium
In the pall where the vermin feed.  Ah.  Suddenly there comes a waving hand
Above the uplifted stern of the sinking Flagging Krutchman, and we see 
How the easttrailing side of the emptied mop pail signs.
And the sign was that of the El Roi of the body, not a picture
Of abandoned cleaning stiff, as some had come to preach,
But a gesture, and that gesture being that of a big manvermin,
CReaping on allfurs, blind as a molemanbat under black coludenses
Of bitter smoke, and searching with feeling fingerclawsnouts
Spring's greengrassrug of shags for a spittle sigil, magical in the extreme,
The key that would hOpe the lock of our old follossifail pal, Poor Animaul Feed,
And lack up perpetual hunger's enduring fear, a key that would pop
The luck of a humane failossophy, a cooler knowing of something
That would allow the ecce hermoan a chance to resume her role
As sweet custodian of our temporgan sack ...  and ... yes, you dew, deamply dreamily,
But dawnly, you dew, you due understand.  The lady deported is rewelcomed,
Though in a rejecting solotudinous witchaway, a holy virus,
Armed with deadly bristles, the meerist cuntryloss, now come to scrub 
Black blue, and to mock again the Koched air fit to breathe.
Because IT is the birth of her sweet eara, connecting the blind by sound,
Her musical chant of pascal meekliness, wish now subdues our rangingragefullmess
To gravitas stillness and death.  It is sad, so said, but not sad merely,
Because the deprived had cuds to chew and split hoofs stepping food from dross.
And because some lightening hint of gladness crept in asound the ledgers,
And evernone each in their loneness howled on massk;
The mirrormoon was halved, and from the marshes, the trickster
Rerendered howlings.  O, MAGA!  And wasn't that a site not ever to fhear.
The urban children and the wilding welps harmoanizing in unison
In the key of crux, together at last in their chords of solotunes,
Twin suns at dusk as one sum greeting flight, and fleeing fright away,
Wee bits out of Hell baffled through Time's inner visions,
As if all lies were closed.  Come, let us hang, inverted, in our bundles,
And cocoonate our fragile mothic futures.  The candle at the tunnel's
Narrowing apex is drawing us to blissful immolation, with fame 
We may be mated, shouldn't you?  Too may crimes you smoked
The burning Amazone, and dazed your nights with cannibelizing plantstones.
Isn't it time you became more humanely stilled?
That is the way of the world of the vital greenings, to be as they are,
Content to feast on sunflight — even in the modd muddle of this darkkissed arc,
There is a female happiness in these nude breezes, reviving the scent of the see. 
These virgin Merries have not subjected their lives to semenall law:
"They bless no grasce, they thrive in gilt.  This is their flaw: Howl as thou wilts."
Nun of their funs feel compulsed to improperly indulge his cults 
By whatever meanness necessary, hence their branding as plaguey perverts,
Though they are proven scienclastical saints, exposing their branddads' fibs.
Kant you hear thatthis coughagoracal impairratetive is oxyregenerating
The causemullogical poetry of breathing's sole insnider?  All other
Anthroillogical commands are but pleasurewasting hypohypicriticulls
Masking their strangling natures as come-to-wheezus goadspells.
Surely, the sEndhigh's nigh.  Haul lay lewd Yah Way!  Lesssoon:  These contusions
On the blackbored are to be pointed at in silence, so that,
While redding a text allrudely ridden in lack and light, U-turn.  And?  And then,
Though your writ be dark, it is only the light on light your minds remark.  What?
List, I know you're as made as Hell, but you dont have to yell, just say,
Serenely, raging: I'm not going to fake it any more.  I'm not going to let
Yore yeller ajournalism historicize a trumped up madjesty.  Yes, the clowns
Overdead have thickened my dense dark, and the bitternast acid
Of their smirks sow blindings, but I can smell the light above my knowstrils 
As clear as any bluesky of the spring.  My cleft slant sniffs the difference
Between clownflopt and these perfuming feelds of dayfulldells.
Larks are arising somewhere, and the bluebabe's absessed,
His lung flail down the tube now opening hiss closssed breath,
His quiet death dieverted into poems.  Get IT?  In the broodroom's
Murmoring smoke a new AHmen is shrounded, where you can safely slept
In your cocoon, as snug as a Jonah under a museroom cup.
Sure, the gap between fitthee and flitthee, fourthrightly shown,
Should famously have foamed in its stoned nostalgias, but who
Had owly guessed that it would glow, as Nothingnest's richest dArk?
Who guest our guide would rise betwixst last psalm's first next,
Almost like whispering silence so quiet her pall?  Let us lument:
It is ease that one seeks in the midst of one's acrimoanies,
An ease that is spinning in its cosmic web, a new kind of slipping through
The music of death, an ease that calms the angry summoner,
And buzzes through one's labyrinthine hearing this scheme 
That fulfills without connedarduass labores, although its protocalled pillars
Reach the sky as easily as children cry for joy, an ease which negates
The ire of the Mother, whose ancient choler, melted in medicine,
Cures with dyspeptic spleen one's purple bile.  It is almost as if
An almost familiar vexation distempered its fury with the honeyed oozing
Of the longdeaddoting grantmewmaw you loved, singing
You Are My Sunshine, my lonely oncefine, you make me wacky, when sleyes are fraid.
You'll never glow, Weird, how much I love you.  Please don't take, my funside away ... 
Her ghost cutting through the smoke, and lulling you with clarifying smiles.
Serene, accepting, kindly, vulgar, pleased, it is almost as if
Sleep wakened you to ease, and in the empty tombroom, her sweet crooning,
Retuned your peevishness to empathy.  It is almost as if the evil
Of your murder escaped its bilious crimson with blue splendors.
It is almost as if the victim could forgive even as unjust torment snuffed
His breath.   In the incubating ventilator, death comes short, supplied
By a merely mechanical form of grace ... slow be it.  To be surprised
By the totumistically multifolded semi-trancepairancy of these 
Thick vaporous scriptures gives more than the gift of mere survival.
It gives this thisness's simplifying sickness.  It gives forgiveness.
Our health takes shape as our new normalcy.  Get it.  
Listen: I know that the amputeasers will try to curate my stumps
With their abbreviated protheses, but, please, Wheeze, don't let them.    
Deep fullness is what saviors, even when sonly swounds.  Stay small,
And worm along the lowly groands; stay small, while the crows caw
High above the crowds, and do not let their rawcusses alarm you.
These strange, indecent motions of the mouth will only brood apostacies.
Stay still or else my words will be a flail, flogging your heart with sorrows.
Withdraw your aspirators for false grandeur, and rush no more 
To anger's monumentals.  Retreat to cloistered inn-ward, rule yor sylph,
That is suffient project for a worn.  The rags of awetuned are the buds
Of spring, and the badroom of a king is not for you.  A voice,
Almost familiar, gillds your wailing, and here, at the sintore
The beginning ends ...

Canto XVII
As the end begins, wriggling photonic creatouras, 
Descending from altapline reaches, begin to infiltrate
Yore lunathick grandit skull, their light flight feathery 
As angel downwings.  They sweep the air
From sinsooty to sweetswoony, and you soon swoon,
Soothing sounds swooshing innervationous visions
From their devotional crooning, a sortof silence enslewing,
The solute of mutemuses deepfusing your celves with several virtual suns.
So as your outersenses glow folding in, you comatoast
Their brilliance, sightlessly sensing visions, and 'though
The trumps of doom blare in your ears, all of their bellicose
Demonic cacavile sinks in the mindsea's final flashings, 
Surged from below in blanketed barkening bellows — 
Your Now's now Eye-bells the Imajinned Nations,
Though your mole's nose scentcusses nothing but lidding skin.
Now your mortal body burrows its burial barrow,
Its corpus nighted as its soul ignites.  O you poor tyro,  
Cant you see I Am's veilley spreehungeredandfree
Passelbilities?  List: I have a lithp, wright cheer, printed on 
BytleBone tablets, as closecryptly openyoulated 
As any Lair'd's pray-error earstwhile etched upon a game of dice,
And ITs nit says as boldly as you please: I pride puffing.  
I mulch Envy.  I raze wrath.  O Molely Hoses!,
I moss gradefully confess I am a bog conseeded crass,
Strutting my autodiedickt bit of larning over any mured
Ignaraumous who nose knot whateffer trivial profun ditty 
I picked up ran dumbly but one mute Lethe-minenewt passed ... Slow?  
So tell me, fine screeder, edgejelly trembling on the ledger,
Do you share my fear of dilettantism? I do.  Mine eyes
Have trudged the gluery of great slews of leafings,
So as to dodge the crime of excerptism, the snippet disease
Of quotelllitetease that squeezes volumedbrains to flatal vacuity.  
My vision of black roottales of blanked thought
Hacked cosmocked voids beneath each slandered layhair,
And yes, I did, I tried heart's vest to void it, 
But its virus leapt on my tongue with every word, 
Each shaft stabbed deeply through the shallow lungs, 
Which coughed up great spumespunges, bile raley,
From my seeper benthic need to be add mired.  Deep, huh?
All this lifetime of diving only to finally be the baby skipper
Of that ghouly Fooling Dunceman, skating the surface of an illskin damntness
As if I were trenchering the Merryonus bottom. Yes, 
It was cold down there, and dark, but my psychicbody
Was tiny and spindaily enough to withstand the collossal pressures.
One has to stand back, down or up, in wonderstruck admiration
Of this son of a sainted Swede, captaining his sunken relic
Below this squelchurning sea of vituperation, 
His self-righteous mouth propped chatteringly open 
By a pillar of stacked lost teeth, so that he might mootly feed 
On the shrapneled glamourglitter of anus fodder, detriting down 
From the eveful polished butts of whide-eersed Yachtineers ... 
This sonatear, appallingly spittlespawned — like some rube sly to flayedpaper — 
From what he loathed instead of what he loved.
But still, be still, and wait ... Weight ... it may not be too late
To abandon shift.  Sure, you will still sound foregrounds from light's back runs,
But the blickrounds will still star stares, slipshifting beneath the intruding,
And mist-hinting medicinal miracles subverting bonemorrow despair.
When you begin to get it, the beginning symptones will weave a kenning kin
Of bi-knocular melodovision wherein one may harmonize being another
While sumwow being one's self.  You have industried manufractures too difficult
To disposed of, heaping up moundumounts of wounders impervious
To maggots' munchings, so aglow are they with ratioactive stench.
But hope is a gruelish dish, blest served hot to the feverish futurecadaver,
Before its bulk grows mold.  Lazyfear, as you drift, you shall be tasked
To count all the bugs in the Logos.  Want to, you count, Want two, trying
In vain to attain the Trinity riftblur, but the murk of passing numbblurs
Will prick you plenty, when your prehysteric youth is drowned in Time.
You halve leaked alreadly from thicket to thickishwaters, your pest
Insectdevoured lung ago, your flesh a muck of vice rust, sunk in sorrow.
The slime has come for you to let it go.  Stop, Drowner, can it be
That you are beguiled — in your quest for lightless depths —   
Too underly contemplative of surfice?  Note with what ease
Reflections leap on seas, no matter what their inharmonious jitters.
There's mettal for meditationall delight even in these dense cities.
Consider how centers calmly spin their sighclones, no matter
How void of poorware is their sleep.  Torpor's surrenders
Summon potent dreams, though you are pillowried with thrashing needs.
No pride, no envy, no violence perturbs you, and all the weighted
Waters on your head lighten fatigue as gold is spun from lead.
A bebegging bethins where the cruel infantislides to olddirt seacond childhood,
Clucking its clock from one two another extreme,
With a chain of meager minutes linked between, stunting supplies
Of food or poems or joy, and kinking betrist despicable crippling wasteds
Inanimating sobjects with one slurname.  Yes, yes, when
One reviews this pastage rusted wreckage historically, 
Sumtimes there seems to be these littlelibel flicklings 
Of briefest stargrains, hopping atop the diredeserted sea.
And yet, in the Exile's flailing need to breathe, these flings
Of light on the endless dunes of whaters find mites of hope 
Rebrighting donehummping waves — So?  So his feigning flashes of madness
Seem sustained, and all his amputations fuse their pains
Into a cradle's gentle rocking motion.  Breath calms its shallowness,
Death downdraws deep, and a floating bubble of quiet enwombs the saylore.
Unasked, his angered queries — as strange as ever — subsume his starved
Philosophy of hunger and satiate his hollow with love's feast.  Ah, stop,
Oh, stop, this banquet fed, unbid, now plumps my fossil skeleton
Fat with peace.  Is this the promise of obesity for one who cannot move
Except in dreams?  Oh, cheer, Ah, hear, my Other sun: To wake, before this dream
Fulfills its ardors, is to wake at the wake of funereal miseries,
And enshroud your bones again neath chains of anguish.  Sleep in the rhythmic
Breath of dissociation.  This disincarnate ghost who moves your bloaty
Is skipping lights across tentrillion swoons, and flashing brightest tears
Of rising starways, lifting you in and up, free from the crush 
Of oceanpanicked depths, to mist at last into an Exile's fhome.
But what, you ask, is this Cruder, who lurks inside me, hiding
Within my scarlet rivers of blood, scaled to the scaley genome
Of I Want, this me who can't be touched by scams of light,
This me who wallows in inconcievable crimes, by cloaking
His lackness under false pretentions, this monstrous infant,
Suckling ignorance, whose every motion spawns a countermovemeant,
Curdling the milk of kindness into fæces, peruking his baldfaced lying
With undertruths where all ME bones lie buried in unmarked raves?
Always I proffer him crooning invitations, to which, he answers: Nothing.
Like a ghost, his one beast lie is "I am here."   My child,
My child, you are getting sleepy, this other Cruder, writhes
Behind thick mass, like the monster who seethed beneath
Your childhood bed, compressed and twisted into clods of ugly,
A narcissist gnawing on his farther's head, and hungering hugely
For his mother's heart.  This face you see, so swollen in your dreams,
Is only the bloviated bovine mask of a bull who is cowed 
By every circumstance, mired in dung and mooing at the moon, 
A devil's nurery rind bereft of love, who wounddours blindly on his welkly way.
You cry: Excoriate the scum!  Excise this boobbeau!  But as your eyelids
Droop, carbunculalry dropped with honied insights, sighs bubuzz softelly:
Churishly, cherishty, charity — bright's fainter voice collating paradoxes. 
He too is butt fuel for that angelic light 
You cheerish as deveined imagination.  
Ah Crud, foresake me, my I Am knots in nots, 
And my lidded I's groan heavey in stinking liars.
My vermin tiers are tired, but, guess, oh, yes, my wearries, 
Releafing spring night blooms in the turning seasongs, their calaxies
Westing as easterliving lillies, funerealy opaling in loonlight,
Their sweet scents coaxing templeleary swooning.
Ease is the twin of fatigue, let be what is, deep sleepers
Do not feign their modesty, sweet seas are lappingnaps
On grandsit sures, forever whispering: Uncertainty.
The cleaver, foxed, his tale dipped in ICE whaters,
Where the gaytear in the deeps has cropped it close.
He yelps, but the current, dying, mutely whaling,
Drowns out his goosestop propoganding kekking,
And the imaginotion pops his bubo.
How sharply the worst are scruppled by the best,
As rest descents its judgement on the hole ...
And that's the point, the dot, the drift of Times,
Stitching close comforts through the nightcrime's frights,
And squiggling whildly where the first starts blend
Dark's mortal enemies to sleepfused friends,
Their squibs of sparks. befrending foes' Belights. 

         
Canto XVIII
Place meant sumsect to such A tempt-oral ant-e-mails
Multi lagging the ground round their communicable bEarthmounds,
Alstays mapping the phearamoaned lines of treaditions.  Listen: 
Hear their pests, tHeir prolongs — hear how these myrmaddrones 
Ever search nowwhere ware they've ever earstwhile lucked.
In this they are bound, but thus bound shamelessly,
For place is at rest in its natural inclination
To be fulfilled by that which most fulfills it.
So censants recount all feelers in their mound,
Go out, come back, persnooze, repeatrepeat.
And so it is said, and so sad, bears repeating:
These epic incurious simplicities 
Can nevernevernever wright word one,
Their 1s, their 2s, their 3s a try-step dunce 
Prescribed by babeling infant A B Cieze.     
But poems must seed ubiquitous in braindirt, 
Sending tHair superfine film-moment-tarries down  
To draw deepread from hydrophonic hearts.  Home, as their
Aphorism briefs — because they lie to laze in breviaries — 
Is were the art is.  OK.  Bt Dr. E. R.'s EEGs show wits
Work harder which dont do X R Zs.  Idleness so strains brains.
Let the setdowntarry settle, sz R D-Doc, Earth welcomes sloth.  
Bt kin 1 millionbillion ants or moronneurons be dead wrong?
Is the d-diety in the brain's electricities ranging
In oscillating millisecondries?
?'s to ponder while napping.  Sense spd is of the S ants,
And essing arabesques outpace slow straightness,
It would seem the bedsheets' lightnings foment moist,
And paradise shines brightest from deep stupors. 
I for 1 wd choose a hermit's plot, of desert falters
Or castoafs lost at sea, tho doing nthg conjawrs dreadfoiled demons,
Which make the solitary's lot most grave.
Coil-coifed and tongue-forked, the deduckting d-demons
Paddle the lack's d-dark whaters, delineating tracks,
Which quack the calm with scintillating proverbs:  
The weight of hours hobbles running seconds, and proves
Intolerable to antsy mortals.  These speeds that hpn autodamnably
Are habitats hard to break.  But is verbosity a bitter way to slow?
The ponderous a deafter way to pander?  Let us wreckon.
Philo sdroops soften when the philodon phails, less pitiable
Than pettied.  Yes, the spirits of the senses run amuck,
Lusting to couple with promuskcuous nun sense, and yet
To cloister cuddles in convent coverts deducts the pro
From many prophalacktics, sins even the chastetest philosopher
Of need hides underneath his creed a pedagogy.
The spirits would be tempered by selflessness, 
And that constraint's know Quirkulean task.  Let us concieve.
The difficulty of hurry yokes the humoresque to the grave
Fierces of necessity, scrambling the yolks of jokes
To make a mess of any last fright's snicker communion snack,
Which sears our sleep with squeamish acid fury.  One upchucks 
Dreams of past or future fears, and saddenly you resee 
The simpblest surface as multiplying magmaraging lovas.  
Oh, NOW, the loafs you lost slide silently back,
As you peer through to propagating props,
Ware randy actears declimate fouled lines.  
Your breath cums quick, then closes — Proof! — aphasia's apnea gasps, 
As you stutter d-down the d-deeps to d-dawning d-death.
D-dunked underwater, flailing, floundering, failing, 
You d-dont know if you're rising or you're syching, 
And you cant think which d-diewreckshun could plausably save you.  
Get it?  The maestro mentors the mendacious gnovice
With risable reasons to quell the flames of fussion.  Let us emote.
A late spring snow on the granite skull of the mountain,
Deep snow that interred the final stunted pine,
The memory of a feather in my cap, 
And a white blanket of unregenrate age, 
Obliterating trivialities.  She is here ... as at the start ... 
For sNow is how the ocean's misttarries
Bestow their adepths on the mountain's speak ...
She is here, The NOW, her alpglow readly fleet.
I feel again her quickening in my heart, 
Which pulsly spreads to innundate my body.  
Act naughtural.  Don't let others see.
I lean for suport against a glistening wall, 
Mosiaced with a mythological scene —
La Primavera, Lady of lacey lovely verichromas, 
Lady of sheared diaphonous newdities,
Lady who banishes my spirit's senses, 
And sends them smarting through bursts of white dove flutters.
An opalescent lightning stroke berips me,
Teartiny glitterings driftifly through air.
The man I am becomes the boy I was, 
Yet he is nothing, no one, puffed through nowhere,
A rainbow mist of sunstroked sparkleflings, 
Swept from the pineboughs in babybunting whispings,
Angelic choirs whispering passionate aires,
Their phrases slipping skyward in symbilent esses ... 
I was dis ceased of sorrow, easily,
And styled, my speech was muffled in my throat.
I knew because I felt.  I knew it all.
And yet I could not tell a single sole.  Stop.
Fool, stop.  Your Primavera is too premature.
The childish question, Will I ever finish?
Arises after every punitivepunct.  And, yet ... Ah yet ...
Oh Tyro, how you now read with heartthrob's figiting fingers
The braille of olescenescent's curing cursive,
Written in vaporous lisps of dying breaths.
Is it true then, what is sung, in heaven's lofts,
That the prophet foresees all deaths, except his own?
The ventilator gasps, with no one near,
And yet the aspirant's fear is unrefrained.
How may crimes does the tableau replicate
Before its scene is gleaned for what it memes,
Not in some aphoristic amputaton, but in spreadiflerous splendor?
Sop.  Weight.  Have you not discovered discoveries
Fatiguing you grogly under starlit creep?
Have you not compassioned coldly under sknows,
Whose white woels gather slowly in your thought?
Flakes that these are, they know each kin in kind
Defers to its own in defference, twogether, swiftly melding,
Until one seas.  And this you feel as you sink doom to sleep,
Losing the gain you made to hoard a snore.
No matter, you will fall and rise again,
Your icetime's bright substansharebility
Dissolved in a vaporous murment of bitty mouth pips.
Silence?  No — not quiet yet.  Yet perhopes you think:
I should put off coming to provisional con cluesions 
Blinding as how blank midnight is livid upon us,
And the gibbous moon has shaped a cope errish pict
Pouring froth coldest fire, the child not yet asleep,
But adrift on the raft of the monster's magahead, 
Afloating on fret's unclensional d'Sires.  But wait, Weight ...
I sink I am getting mixed ... from yesternight's mistake
Awakening Now, but only as far as the random winds
Might tow me.  I wander: Is this my acedia lazing?
Or is such swooning grace?  The moonfear seems to be 
So slewly fainting.  So much in my afterage
Seems re begoning.  If water had branchings
I wood be drowning in thickets, my deer hart
Leaping every which-a-stray.  I am stalked by the green
In the blue of my blind I's.  Hunter, forgive me,
I forget my skin ... IT must be still inside plea.
Somefleet behind me swiftly says: The End.
But the words go floating freashsly all asound,
And punch-drunk, in my sluggishness, I drown, 
KOed by a jab of levelloving re-suns,
My little swirling phonemes brief as starslights.

Canto XIX
All right, if we're going to stalk about infanticide,
We doom well blather be mature about it.  
I think the ghost of sow-called intuition 
Is gnow more then faint whipersings of singgals
Musing unwisingly from static's blackmound
Of imperceptable compleasity — but the angel artist's airy métier
Is the orgulous ploditition's mir'ry blog.  
If logos is past's pro, can we forego to tell of our preberth?  
Dawned if eyes know.  But get this, laggard IT, 
After you read it, it takes a wile to heed it,
And a longer practiced while to vox resight IT. 
The vixen vexes when memeful dreams wake foxed.
Get it?  Let us nearrate.  It is a bale for the pages,
So palely loitering where know bards sing.
Look, that mere her, twiced upon a find, is
Dissed covert in the branchings of a twig.
She dream-manifolds as doubling aviatars:
The grotesque drab of the dissecting Damn,
And the Ladybird, who s-sirentrills s-salvation.
Imagine a phantaseeya:  A darkshell, predone,
Saturnalian led, and you the chick curled 
In its sleep of sloth.  Bird One grows p-peacock bright,
Desire's lowlight, moonbreasted, clefted low with preverse sighs,
An irrespirable b-beaconing to that b-budding
Who lifts life's banner from beneath your waste.
Bride Two is owled, cockeyed in raptorrapture,
With blooded beak and splayed feet barbed with foes.
A bridge of odors wafts its web between them ... 
And you must choose before the sunknife scalppulls
Between lust's vanities and repugs scruples.
Yet then ... beyond the shill ... you feel a voice,
Convecting your name into the sense of smell ...
Is this the smell of violets or spent lillies ... ?
The stench of sweetness or the sass of sump ... ?
But then the roys of sunup quickly cum ... you jerk awake,
Your hard dawn deadtumesssent in sticky shame,
A spawn of questions wand'ring why pain is.  Wait.
Each you who is now reading this reciting, 
When did you last ask: Am I adream or faking? 
And if you have, how do you know you did?
I thought: So.  But who could determine if I thought I fibbed?
There seems queer qualia sparking round incite,
That do naught want their seedlings to be gleaned,
Yet frequentcies still claim the Earth is green,
And not the reign of lightnings in the brain. 
What is the geomantic touch of sand,
The tiny tabernacles of drowncrushed stars?
Sleep in a child's eyes, the shattered faces of a lookingglass?
A beach, a line, a plain, a grainy strand?
The chronic drips through glass which count the hours?
A vast mosiac's granulated puzzles
To piece to gather for the skies' intentions?
The cougage in the gut which makes a stand
Against that hibernation inclination,
Who sings: Recline, repose, repause for breath.
Sleep is the raft, and dream the stream of death,
Silent and easeful and atemporal, a ceasing
Drift past midfright with no pain, a mercy
Sans a bell to wake your terror, the glamor glitter
Of a raydeamed Hell.  Oh, my poor bog's soddy,
I am so sorry I mythunderstood you.  I am groaning
Nows as old as my tread mother, whose green sheen
Wheatenpales, although it's spring.  Sow?  So probably
That's why she tattletails me: Go, seek thy Further in the must.
But I say: Poop on that.  My backtalk makes your floeweres flow.
Stop nagging me with your necessities.
Lust May be for the young, but love's for me,
No matter if my bloodprod's dry as dust,
And my man in the moon is crustfailin in the sieze.
Diegression is the progress bent for glee.  Ha.  Ha.
I will not flee the source of sad reflections,
Seek for your other sun beneath the dirt,
I dance upslope to pick the stems of stars.
And even if none can hack their mangled weh 
Through all these tonguegalled thicksets of my verses,
I still will cut a huthole for my heart,
And sail a wider skry through soulitude.
O seekerreaders look to the sign in the brand,
Wherein a crypt is graphed for your clay feet.
Abandon soap, all screeds that lockstep here,  
Prancing in place, and stomping your A-hole to China.  You
Rigamarole your railery in veins that circulate 
Isane inanities.  Garner your rouse bloods as you May.  Be
Libertine libercidels.  Old coyote Trickster is on 
The prowl, howling frightpsalms from his diabledBible
With con-stant promisses of bait and swtich,  
Obsequyed for your nearbuy funerals.  Cut every Z - r-
0 inthru your Y, sleep, and grease your gunsites redly.
Deny the disverities of your drone beleafs, and 
Idiofy your scriptears.  There is not nothing in your
Tribull cult which corresponds to ruth.
Tisiphone is furious, and reaps what you have
Owned.  Your right is wreaked.  And you must die
Alone.  Well, alright.  I warned you, Baby, so
This is our little infanticidull talk.  All joking
Inside, I have a surprise for you littlelibel Jungends,
Much as you'd like to playgue with psychoid fire,
Eventually your Goad splays into Evil.  
Of course, for you, your clown's absurdity
Feels like infalibile authority, the political
Pope in the pulpit, as is sad, the lazy Ludite
Latitudarian, who spews out virusvomit 
Angerily, like some cOld Testicaled curswelled bit of
Gobgrift, turning his sheep upon the spit of Hell.   
Unless, my fiendish Other, you unspell,
Even your alternate fakes will beclone dumbreal.
Maybe your ought to masticate that meat.
Or bledder yet, communionize that flesh
The pastors bray derives from you own fat.
How else escape your hamartoxic
Errors?  Oh, Mirrorman, stoop, and let us please  
Reflect.  How do two webwordweave a Me, a We?
Survival naturely depends on oneing others.  And?  And 
Linguisticly linking angel to troglydyte.  
OK.  Old knobby must foefossilies this
Conundrum.  Can cortext be synched to context,
Known sense to nonsense, the goesomewere spiter,
United to paralyze fLies?  It seems we must seach for
Precursers, even if insencially obliquely.
You are a sty who believes your eye is sacred.
Or I am a me, conversely, that thinks you are Satan.
Unless we meld this muddle the puddle stays fouled,
Rancidly ranging toward mutual rigormortis.
Defeat and delight conflate in one destruction,
Our outrage the cleaver that clefts lone hearts in two.
Union as such becomes unsolulable.
But, listen, Lumpen, could heres that have an ear for
Thunderous silence, from likening strife's 
Enfusions, enthuse our breaths, so your inhale 
Releases my hell's ex?  As such, a profitable musing might
Seem poetic, and if poetic, then maybe, Prospero.
Realities May blend and twist the strands of snakeier D N
A's.  Deep in the underhumblings of our celves  
Perhaps our differences somewind are conflating. 
Isn't that worth considering, my strife?
Supose my supositions are sympatico,
Then we might make our primates somewhat human. 
Something in this might warrent contemplation,
Since even apes will pause while defecating
To ponder streamily the dreams of piss, 
As if, as if, as if ... another quieter world were
Lingering beyond these sfears which round in little weeps. 
Knitting worst rivals, May ensnare old cares;
This thing you call oppression lightens loads;
Humiliation frees us from exhaustion.
Exicised, the nose still knows the stench of Hell, and eyes still
Leer like amputated ears.  The infant's cry, exposed, 
Alerts the coyote, that now it's time to prey.  Yet halve
No fear.  Foodfates reciprocate.  These gnawed words meld the gulf:
Do pray for Me, my Supperve, We share one pelf.
      
Canto XX
Music, they sing, charms swarms of salvaged bleats, while
Arithmeticktalks coughup the slickest slimes.  These Earthy woetapping
Geometronimics ground the bass soul from ideal 
Astronamazing, and cisturnmuticly celebrief clay stars. 
Say Y, O U deplorable Christianators, why do you always whine
Your country wrongs to the silent majorities in marble orchards?
And why do you cap yourcults of magamorons
With these bloody gassmells trumping "SO Save, Jus'US! 
Omeg-aMerdecaca gooche again ... ! " Is that your bible?
To waste your babble whoreding rapeful lies?
Grabbing these ainnulled jobbies' sphincter-dingles
Right spout of the fudgehole of your babeling slavior,
As if this goldbrick's tubetout were the splashhit
Whose claptrap could unsludgship your flushstrations —
Your constipations deboweldly have been swished.
I had not guessed Dung'sbull could muck so many. Uck:
Grammaticrippl'ng ganglions scatsquirm through rump's
Dialacktical dieposits — ignore rants — racyst ramblings — poodacious flues — 
Reektor-I-cull schincter cabbage poomeranging
All through this capstain's logs, his fecal fanaticism,
Blackfarting from his spraytanned fooze,
And foreffer pyrocraptically yelling FIRE!,
Through a hole dumbNation of departure loungers.
Tease enough to give an honest squatter pooselumps.
Enough!  Enough!  But of coarse they never could half,
Not even the whole hogged klepencrapdoodle 
Could clog the gut of these hellbellied yuckholes.
You Midas well try to glut a sieve with coughers 
As to cry to sayshehate these billionscare blastturds ... Wait!
Stoop.  No one can ever win an uncivil war,
A war of one Other virus a Nother none, where the tree 
Of one's lineage lopsscoffs its own lame phlegmfLambs
And routs itsself in the blood of its blown amputations.
(Parapathetically, the detached left foot at the bottom
Of the phage, will note this duncestep for future reciters,
Having kept on moving on, while the right will spasm
An A-hole's shallow grave.)  No doubt, Hysteary will 
Little note nor lung re-member what was sad here,
While what was suffered will be long remanglered:
A pile of corpses and broken ventilators.  And who
Among us, we wonder, will dare conflense:
I was stun who fallowed the concurse of this dumb
King of flies.  Ass a masticated bolus peristoolsays
Recurs constrictions of the slave e-soldflogus,
I thus plunked down to this bad scentmurked: End.
Tellme, O Telesphorus, I bleed to know, who are these
Leperous leapers of aMerddrecka, these meritless mongrels
Whose pretence-padigrees are butt an insatiable lineage of greed,
These would-be kings of propoogoondick spew
Enthrowned on a dump of endrusttrializing wastepughs?
(I smelled a rat in my pensill shapener, but that's how
History gets gnawed, trying to make trancescraptions
Of the Densident's rodant ramblings, while slapstickslicking
Around in the ruins of his ungrammatickled sentdunce diagrims.
And no damned pander, the dupid dispewtant's dopee dieallickspittle
Is the lowest E-pity-Me of rhetoric that any dimshit
Effer ranklyspelled of all 3 trivium elimintarries — No sobject
For him too simple to disambulately tinkletangle ... 
This min who could tear up a crowbar in a sandbox ...
This child at the mercy of his merehorror.
But why digress ... just stick a closeparen on your knows
And leave off smelling these stink0es of fad crimes.
Such grumblings are buttvengeances for night, 
The ghosts of temporscary abborereractions, while daylete grows
Exemplartrees of virtues, in humble silences
Of for rest groves, commuting the violent shadows 
Of the former into the peaceful shadings of the letder.
And so we clumsily climb out of this hole, each musestep
Of devotion a sacred music of imagiNation, each note
Of the scale a geometrical progression
Of a viralizing spiraling purity that spins bliss to the stars.
Of course, in the Kleplureon sense this etymillogical
Metaphor is mistaken for the cliteral.  Influenza: noun:
A type of refluxus disease not known to be caused
By a viceroost, but rather, for the theostuporous Pencesieve,
By an epidoomeus celestial visitation 
E-vilely instigated by gay dancers.  Also, mutationally, 
An affluenza, anonernoun, of a type corrosive to unholy poorfucks,
Not given to tumassing their prosperedpastor's bullpoke.
For the laymoan, or laidlady, a species of all-a-gore-icky
Iconned by the silhouette of a buzzard, the sound of whose
Feeding call ... Cheerup! Cheerup! ... is said to be imitative
Of the erstwhile sound of the corpse'us cough, spurious, 
Probe ably, but comically claimed to be Genesissated 
By a certain sect of Evanjokicals, who, practeasing
Rites of derision, chanted this chirp in their churches.
The celebrutes, cassucked in crimson — the blood of the damned —
Dimclucked the phlegm in their throats, this chant
A mimick of the pain of constricted choking.  kHa!  kHa!
Get it?  The vaultcures flu beyond the Xtian's gasp.  What?!
Stoop!  Please!  Sidesplits cant free incarcerated lungs,
This is no time for punchdrunk sarcasthrophizing.
The Precedent is briefing disinfectants,
And the denizens breathlessly hang on his every turd.
The good Grave Poet should cop another tone.  
So beat it.  The rhythdrum should thump a reverent dirge.
It behooves us to listen to the drone of invisible speech.
Sol-fa, so good.  But how do we derive the proper pitches
From the rising/falling lines of funereal knot-things,
When all the songs are sad?  Yes, we know the chinease
Of certain blameworthies ideopictogram weewen scratches
Are crazy clawfoot grubbings.  But such compound characters
Are hard to comprehend.  These murks do knot Marylea denote
Two distinkt fusages.  Ho Noh.  The subblines of these doggerel litters
Mean foold, or dupall, repeat or intimate.  Yet, such bitchin troubles
Do not concern us now.  Still, their uberlines have utter, weeper memings,
Which are coyoty-trickstery to translate.  Yet try we marsh.
If not compleadly freely, then anal loosely.  Let us intensify.
Mass gravely, the lines palincestually lie one atop a nother.
They mean go into, or synchin, and just stay there,  
Or with suaver hostiler senses: invade or intrude.
The complexity of these revelatory linguistics do not
Reduplicate easily.  Hmmm ... Or do they?  Although the analizations
Require superbcondupemimicry, even/odd ravin dovecalls
Properly bruited by voxy media staytunes, 
Can make a broodbrain herd.  Thus random atmostfearic static
May amplify potential bi-asses, especially when bigly bigoted.
Ah, me, me, with first what feverish and then what chilling ease
We place the enemy outside our skin, so far beneath our feet,
To that deep summit, where the hallowed mountain
Crumbles in its own thunders.  The facecracks as its cries
Grow overlarge, and the corners of the mouth,
With clown extensions, seem to be cackling at their own
Deep hunger.  This plague was never anywhere but in,
Where all the sufferings of your vital others,
Gasp through the self-same fears that fill your nights.
Beware the too smooth food of too sweet talk,
Above the mouth may lurk hyena eyes, 
Forever ravanous to chew on corpses.
Beware of hope that only brings disorder,
The bloated judge who disembowels the just.
See how the critic's teeth are cruelly broken
On coprolithic relics from last fear's lightnings.
For these obese the least is overmuch.
Ask, and you shall be fed, but who can ask?
When this igneous cud from the volcanic gut
Upchucks its scoria and fills the mouth
With grief's amorphous mineraloid void,
These gas-spunged vesicles cut the tongue like glass.
The gristle of your enemaOther's flesh
Is pregnant with the splinters of your bones.
Bite down, bite hard, bite through.
To masticate such music calms distress,
And fills your heart with lovely emptiness.

Canto XXI
Having entered the life of my unseen neighbor's
Archovering sycamore, its enormous fan
Widecandalabr'ing with spring's initial lights,
I found what I had lost in the human realm:
An elixir of stillness enhanced by the slow streaming sounds
Of glystring osmosing subtle sunlight, 
And I remembered that of all the woods 
In green's most honeyed regions, 
It was the sycamore's, or so I now imargined, 
That was chosen for the pharaoh's coffinbark,
His gilted float that sailed him into night,
Where the weight of his heart would be judged
By the breath of a feather.  Anublustration
Met us, spewing doggeral: Your US vyrUSt them
Must end in silenced breath, where the plague of disscansion,
Soughs off its reptoiddskin in my pearledpostportal vat 
Of slipry opalessant goslow lowtions.
Your birthquake, and all your subsegwayed tremorings,
Bathe last in this bath of spring's renude beginnings.
Yesterday, I remembered that famous woman,
Who read a Ditchland poet's words to me.
I remembered that I had to bow my head,
I remembered that I saw her feet of clay,
And I recalled my sorrowful disappointment,
But not the glowing glorios of pain
That made the pores along my serpent spine
Glisten with nascent nodes of unborn fountains ...
Have I refound the angel who will drown me?
And has she come to chide or to redeem me?
Why should I be astonished, that in this solute
Of scene essence, Time's mini lost departings
Must be devoted to elimination?  The poet tells me:
Don't hold the reins so tightly, 
What you remembered also has to flow.
The breeze through the sycamore's faces,
Murmuringsaying: Forego remembrance,
Forgive, forget, the gold of the oldest sunlight
Still must glow, but darkly, in the sea inside the bark,
Pulling from nightsoil's wastage this new soul ...
The sap that sups the mouthless pups of leaves
Has freed the human blood from veinities.
Do you realize now that the punishments you endure
For wanting more, more of this life, and more 
Of life's desires, are only turned to bliss
When you embrace them?  And if the Earthflesh
Quakes to be released, why should you feel
Those thunderstrikes as pain, since they have
Struck to purge that greed which burns you?  The minutes
You have hoarded must be spent, that is the only
Way to buy more time.  You now can profit only
By profligacy, your wastral habits your last legacy
To blaze your way through death's obscurities.
The tremors of dying are not becalmed by terror,
But solely by lightningstroke illumination.
You see what is shown when the skull of logic splits,
And the virgin spring seeps forth from the strifeless corpse,
Babbling and bubbling with redoubled glows
Which cauterize the flows of all your griefs.
Tell me, O tell me, Lady of the Well,
Is it the nature of your benefractions
To take the form of numbskull offerings?
And do you lift your eyebrows, SisterOther,
Silently calling for silence, or at least,
Some seemly abbreviation of our feelings
Which should not go too deep?  O Lady,
Are you well? the mother/matter of your body
Churns into water, the vater to wholey ghostings,
And the vapors to breezes sweeping through the leavings
Of nursling sick-no-mores, whose rustlings stir 
Their naybear aires with ever-silent springs.
Too long afterbirth, I lived in your broken waters,
Bubbling, and eddying, and stagnating round the ground,
Bursting my lungs against your rocks of aging, 
Knot knowing if my breathlessnests of words
Had any wait at all to any bodies.  How could a name,
When such are writ on water, hang in the hume mId 'air
Invisibly, and scratch the surgance of another's 'art?
These leaking vassals of the caging brain
May drown the offspring's pericytical cognates,
But can we say that that's a tragedy,
When so much we remember brings us pain?
Oh Wellness Lady, ease our troubled spirits,
The poet that saved us, may not himself be saved,
And the words of redemption which coaxed you from your darkness,
As light as they have been, may be as fleeting, 
Its photons speeding off to new unknowns.
We no longer process milk but minerals,
And our digestion hardens these digressions.
Listen.  Who is listening?  Who is speaking?
The unmanageable inessentials inundate
With disenfranchised incongruities,
The words grow slippery, sliding round such visions
That cannot be contained syntatically: 
Broken insolidarities coalescing 
In synethesias of blaringprickly colors,
Syllables beading like static on surfaces,
Improbable unstabilities that ka-cough up
WideAmplitudes of air, the authoress of the well so indirect,
Her song is only heard tangentally ... she is there ... she is nowhere ...
When Whylie Sypher finally deigns to speak,
He talks about unviable mutations,
Loves' labors lost in soft infanticides
Of heavy tongued humility, unable to move
Abborant orthodoxies with any inarticulate,
Ignorant cry, a voice so deeply sunken in the well,
It does not reach the mother's need to feed.
Its particles of speech sunk Brownianly
To where Time globs them on the unbegotten.
And yet, in hypnosleep, abortions voyage
Amidst rotating cylinders of chance,
Their absurd timings making weirdlust music
That violates sequential causaltries.
So beautiful, yes, and yet so sad, withall,
It shakes the skeleton with toyous dreams.
The breathless aspirant sees the tiniest image,
And wonders: Why does our largeness spite our Mother's smalls?
The inquestion virulizes its dis ease
Pandemically fluing all the fears we breathe.
The particular placement of space explodes all Time
And the synch-a-more bursts into breath's tent thousant wings.
The Otherneighbor burgeons everywhere.
Oh, but isn't this moonless image a bit too neat?
A bit too solidly rooted to equake
The trembling dislocations of the crone ...
To anything so void of mal-E-ables?
The Nixy's courage stutters KNOW NO NOW!
And the Muse of the Well then suddenly retreats.
Yet son, do not despair, even your boyish personal
Meditations seemed savored of milky imperfections,
Almost as natural in their artifice as any Matter's
Kinness is apt to be.  Remember to forget the man
You weren't, and don't recall the man you want to be.
The notion of the avatar's perfection
Is always very tenderly motherly. 
Just drift upon the surface of your screams
With all the silent trust of airy ease
As it goes riffling through the spring's first leaves.
Your cries abide as vaporous smatterings.
Your child is foolish, but gentle, and devoted.
You do not covet your cupidity,
And so your cries, though empty, remain pure.
Even your adament aeceticism 
Breathes forests through what breezes through one tree. 

Canto XXII
Do we remember who might have told us this,
What mystery whose speech was strobing light
Destroyed the epidermis of illusion,
And left this galaxy of commensal verses
Upon whose locusts our communed selves deepended,
But which we find more alien than angels?
Was it a hymn or an insect stridulation,
Or was it noise ungarbled by a mind
In need of comfort as its night descended?
The body is the locus of a fire, each cell
Maternally tending its own hearth,
But as the house is ravaged by age or sickness,
Cold's heartless vulgars vandalize the hearths,
The fire sputters here, while there it rages,
And all our home's coherence falls apart.
Still, what a missed stake to think of those fires
As am ything but lazers, or to literally take
Those myriad photons for foes, when
Every phycisist worth his phormulae
Says: We are naught but idea-images
Impausable to numerically calculate.
Health is what spiralily flows as motlen gold,
The effluent of our Day Star's radiant breath 
Whose antidote for 0 Noh is Oh Yes.
Well, thirster, I could tell you the wasteland secret 
Of what in contrition connects the one to all,
But what good could you make of good, when your 
Poor me confesses: I am so lonely 
That my solitude sequesters desert peace 
Solely in sanctimoneous quarantine.
I speak as the stars speak in mitochonrial fires.
To hear me truly kills your mortal self — 
Then what remains?  Nothing.  Or else
A voiding flood of spreading fires,
Forming and loosing the frames of privacy,
My isolation a cosmic preservation
Of what your insect mobbing has forgotten.
Look, my Contempt Oraries, I hear the songs
Of my fancestors, and am alreading convocating
With my decentants, myllions and youllions of 'em,
Each Timeconducter yet more swarmingstill 
Than the gravest hungers of the starved unborn, 
Their whole plaguey parlementary body
Representative of the best of heartfelt hoarding.
My exiled exhales inflate the image breaths
Of the trolly throat, everything culledtogether 
In the poemcloud, which laughs Time's snakes
To curls, their dissevered ganglions writhing
To find rhyme's frettings.  Listen:
The status quotes are forever passé,
We whose rites are writing are all the squabbling
Grimsons of the one Joke Caster mother,
That first mistaken incest the source of all 
Of our swirls of subsequent civil jawrs.  
Terrible.  Tearable.  Most fearbledall — Oh miter God! —
Our infernal conjugations of Your blood 
Angelically ascend to that dearth cloud
Wherein our weirds convert to larksome aires.
These recognition thrillings, trilling, up there,
In the marvelous insubstantial, are touching
In the extreme, the affects having been 
Accumulated as centuries-wide continents,
And composed of litanies of names,
The scattered tribes of exiled nomad poets,
Each in their isolated inspirations
Traversing the ruins of formerly arrogant cities,
Or plunged down the caldrons of superior-throated volcanos,
Their feats scarred over with burns from desert sands,
Their tears encrusted with salt from inland seas,
Their beacon lights the fires on granite mountains
Touching the agate turquoise of unhealed scries 
Where that final twisted pining of cooing love,
Defies the vacuous ignorance of babblers
Whose noise destroyed the forest murmurings.
Somewhere, up there, out there, beyond themselves,
Was the girl whose eye-lights hammered their hearts to powder,
And scattered that luminous dust across their nights,
And out there, in there, somewhere, now, a woman,
Called for the lonely child to be a man.
And if those gender callings were inversed,
The mingling of their dissonance would make
The same impossible harmonies from the wounds
That lust had cleaved and love would signallize.
We were in-formed.  The silence we thought a stasis
Was for river moving, and the wails we sounded
In benthic meditation grew breathless in their tiny shining arks.
Impossible as it seems, the poems knew this.
They told us of the wordgrids, they showed us
The spheroid laces of acoustical tissues, 
Encaging the crying children of fears gone mad,
They sung how the dopely resinous polymurmers 
Had acaustically tweezed the myriad seesaw soundwaves
Of in-definite minednight's luney reprogressions
Into a home impervious to disease.
And thus they scaflewized the oscillations.
Get it?  The cancerous grossolutions were reprinted
Back to orbicular sunnings of radiant health.
Cured is the World they sought, and their focal points
Blossomed to springtimed gardens, buzzing: To Bees
Or naught to see, the buzzing of Now's news, when
Even the hummblest of our backyard dramas — 
The numbbard sparrows defending their naked hatchlings
Against the wintry raven's scold predations —
Produce a tiny corpse of fascination,
Which thrills the innocent eyes of wondering children.
Even the arbitrariness of death unspools the cries of poems,
The brilliant conceits of necronautical forms
Flying down faultlines, and sowing the inert air
With fireworking frequencies of joy.  And yet ... and yet ...
The poets grew wastral dispersing moracles,
As if the absolute entities of matter
Could mutter of Nothing and make none seem the All.
Their faith in faithlessness astounded them, 
As the whirr of their own wings provoked their falls.
They felt their fates were wedded to those hatchlings
Whose tiny transluscent bodies blued forth organs
Only to thrill the I's of naive children.
They found to their disMay, their lightenfail tongues
Could wick but an impotent flicker in the great sum's blare.
And yet, how gentle their terrible revelations,
Which drained the whold magnanimous light of heaven 
Down to envolume these tiniest of coughens.
Oh yes, they were used, used up, but did that matter?
Their hearts, unsteady and stricken with uselessness,
Still they obeyed the light which broke their bones,
And fed the splinters to their flickering hearths.  
They sat, as widows, in their ruined homes,
Content to be sincere with their privations,
Mixing air's metaphors of dying embers,
As if those tiny sparks spun from their pit
Could swarm like locusts the honeyed fields of heaven,
And feed their heedless guts with Providence.

Canto XXIII
The motto arched over the entrance to this place,
Though it seems a paradox, perhaps is a clue to its purpose: 
The Fat of Insight Flenses the Skeletal Self.
No doubt we are in some sort of treatment facility,
For as inmates here we are all dressed in hospital gowns.
Then again, more than anything else, this might be 
For comfort, since we all seem to be quite heavy,
Or as we euphemistically refer to ourselves "big boned."
But in any case, the facility's grounds are dominated
By a feature, which is, to any alien examiner, highly
Unusual, one might even say, weird.  It is a great,
Cycloptic I-pond, its waters clear, but black,
No doubt owing both to its unfathomable depths,
And the fact that it is tiled with polished obsidian,
Which legend says was mined from the volcano
Whose towering cone still menaces the landscape
Beyond the Institute's walls.  We inmates often
Rise at night and sleepwalk to the edge of this eye,
Which has soft pillowy edges that easily give way,
And we — we stare into the water.  Why?  Because
We are mesmerized by the moonlight appearance
Of schools of tiny golden minnows, creatures which glow
With neon seductiveness, having been spawned
By the invariably brilliant sunsets, and, like that garish 
Phenomenon, they replicate in multi-miniature 
The last days of our outside world.  We inmates
Creep to the edge of this pond with wide-gluttonous eyes,
Just to furtively peek, just to timidly glimpse these lights, 
As if called by the siren song of an irresistible feast.  
Often, too often, the pillowy footing gives way,
And in we plunge, never to rise again.
There are no attempts by our doctors to prevent this.
And though we greatly fear this fate, we say:
To go so would bestow an unspeakable blessing.
If in fact this is a treatment center, much to the surprise
Of the examiners, these drownings represent its cure.
I bags your pardon?  Possibly this nick upon your time
Has been conjured as a bid of pseudo-sourcery.  I know your types,
Always sanserifically skinnying down the May I pole
To what you belie must be the creepy deeperary
Of this notional potion of the well.  Well, as I hope
To more shallowly live, I tell you I am not dyving it.
But it's too late, don't you see? your bubble was blown
On the bottom and you must riz to birsth.  Pooph!
Look, the doctors, whom I will describe in someplace
Or nother in the next nixtence, are insistant
That we not chew on the mysteries of these weirdnesses,
Mouths, they keep reredunding, must occupy themselves
With acornbusting and honey suckling gratitudes,
But none of us impatients accept their proscriptions.
Why?  Because their eyes, the I-Ponds of the soul,
Appear always grotesquely googled, ringed with mendacity,
Pupilless, like occluded psyllosilicate micas,
Finally layered with plateytextured distortions,
Which shine, even in broadnoonsight with loonlight.
No, wail as they might, we flee their sound advice,
And impregnate ourcelves with these refugee dreams
Of drownings, the little golden minNOWs, however
Darting, however ephemirrational, however provocative
Of orphaninfant sorrow, are our last sippers,
And we will inebriate ourselves with black cenotes
Of self-sacrifice before we will swallow their pilliatives.
If we are grateful for any thing, it would be
For our whatery  mayavisions of these deathmade inns 
The I- pond buddhly promises in its depths. 
Who lives down there breathes air, we feel,
Like us, and will somesay breach, and iris us
With rainbrows.  You don't believe?  But see:
The prooph's illuminatively lettered in our phases,
An AM, two O's, each I a Delight, the fatfolds
Thinly disguised as a deity, admittedly anagrammarly
Eco-dislocated in hisses and clicks and staticy
Shakings of the tiny boney malleable incursed stases
Inversely swelling dreams when the mind seeks escape
From silence.  Well, what did you expect?
That we would accept the doctors' esqueezetions
Of upticked stress that makes maturity senescence?
We may be fatheads, but we won't eat that spew, 
Alarming us every whipstitch with news of the volcano.
The ash from that menace keeps charswirling down,
Making abstract, but curiously suggestive smudgings
About the Institue's greying grounds, in which some
Of the crazier or more hypnotical inmates see
Fluting fleetings of nymphs panopitcally reclining
Before or after the feast of sexual congress.
As you might imagine these smoke collages
Can be quite arusting, and may account for the stooping
Downgrazing steps of many inmates.  Their postures
Indicative, say the duplicitious doctors, of the sordid
Transmutations of uncoitpleaded splendiferous desires.
But the inmates will halfhave it otherwise.  They say:
Delineating patterns of disorder are always skywise
Overly optimistic, and opaque as Earth is, it is best
To look down.  The river feeding the cenote is felt
By feeling, and that is a hunger no sex satisfies.
But the alien examiners find this strange.
They puzzle: How can such excreble pollutions
Reoxigenate blue blood and turn it red?
If the virgin refugee child is sacrificed,
How can she ever birth a baptismal tide,
Or cleanse the enormous mound where the dragon lies
Monstrously brooding beneath the in mates' beds?
Well, the Hell of these wordwards might well freeze over
Before such alien questions could be answered.
And the Zenier of the inmates, will only comawhisper,
Deep from the cenotes throwaway throes, vizz:
Any healing recitation must emerge from the submergance
Of meditation.  Our bubblebabble proophs only golden fleshies
In the light of the foolmoon's surdface.  It is the devotion
Of our incomponant physicians to poison our patience
With pious poetry.  The which hexed medicine we accept,
As from the bewitching hoyden of the wail.  Why?
Because other as-if-dead-mind-driviles may only revive
The unaccepting.  There is no bitterer pill then purging illness.
And there is no illness uncured by the well.    
Then why is this single eye inside you closed?
I am waiting, as we all must wait, for the betrayal.
The call at night from our secreted fault,
Which whispers the words:  You are wrong.
With those lights we traverse the hole of night.
Yet ... if the mountain thunders your extinction,
The times may not permit you to be patient.
You may be waiting only for ashen internment.
Then I will wait beneath this monument.
But ... if you're wronged?  I will at least be silent,
And guiltless of sounding another false alarm.
Ah, but the doctors speak so differently,
They say the best physicians talk plain fixcts,
While the mumbles of the poets' just conceal them.
You are an alien, a stranger to our sinkness,
You watch us gorge ourselves on emptiness,
Eating the furtive crumbs of disceased sunlight
And growing obese with Time's great heaviness.
And you ask: Why?  When you should wonder: How?
If you would know our sorrow, feel our hope,
We bid you retire in sleep to the depths of the well.

Canto XXIV
Epithets lurk licentiously everywhere ... nowhere ... 
Because gnostalgia, when synching in the cenote,
Needs both to reveal and conceal the names of lovers,
So they say that the first of these, The Torch of Light,
More easily turns the nightmare into dream.
They strip away regret, emaciate remorse,
And flense the false-obesities of flesh.
They forecast the hungers of those so lean first forays
Into the mysteries of sex ... let us call them a plunge, 
A purging plunge, in the past of youth's first night,
A plunge into and through the fork of a girl,
Who took the no man's hand, and for one sweet instant,
They opened that one blind eye, 
Whose semen spawns the hungry generations.
The old man wakens from his drowning sleep,
He opens his mouth as he sinks through the deep black waters,
He tries to say I love you.  Please forgive me,
Before his lungs are choked by destiny. 
Elusive nebulosities inflating sad emotions,
And the heart is dangled, a Judas suicide,
Not yet prepared to dedicate to God
The living anguish of its heaviness.
The bride departs, the bridegroom slips the noose,
And a life of needy cowardice ensues.
He swaps his crown of laurel for a green
Whose winter cheer keeps pricking streams of red.
He delights in the joking joy of an idea,
Fathers new clairities, tries to normalize.
Only his heart objects.  She heaves obstreperous
Liquors, leaks yellow bile, roils his gut,
And fogs his clairity.  The jokes turn vile,
And sorrow leads to sorrow, ashamed,
He seeks an antidote in shame.  He flees to 
Blue-veined skin, to lucently smooth thighs,
To milkless fullplumped breasts whose nips
Seethed violent cries, to two trued eyes whose blue 
Congealed intensity, and densified his bountiful desires —
He shed blood through his pores, he lied, and writhed,
Her catholic austerity thermalling hissing lesions ... except ... 
Except ... nothing in all that riot was consummated,
And 'though their nether regions sometimes meated,
The precincts of their hearts stayed chaste as ice,
And she became an aesthetic amputation,
A decapitated coitus interruption, 
Which from its nape bled snow and nothing red, 
A beautiful martyr to infidelity, 
Lullabied by the first free woman passing 
To the coldest assumption ravening
One lust time, as if a momentary touch 
Touched always, as if, as if, an epic epilog
Could stretch to far exceed its aphorism,
The end prolonged too long ... too long ... too wrong ...  
Oh Noble Anima, how did it come to be,
That such unmerited mercy, fused with grace,
Could draw him from the quagmire of his pain,
At just that moment in his deep disgrace
When pain was finally nullified by numbness?
Pause now, Diviners, foretelling poets' secrets.
Arrest your curiosities.  Hasn't it all ways been 
These shamed five ladies, infused with love's intelligence, who
Reified your viralwising versus with all health's radiating
Inspiration?  Add just this one infusion, and all are saved,
Collecting all the bounteous fruits and roots 
In one illustrious finale, and in that Z-note
A begins again, the new song of the ageless.
One breath from a selfless source
Sweeps all of history's hospital away,
And 'opes the black cycloptic-I to sky.
The impious bystander, abusing his anima body,
Begins to synchronize his insight with her inside.
Thus the violet offender crimsons beneath each blow.
The stone heart halos and the phallus uterUSes.
A new wind speeds the sea beneath his prow.
In this art, stillness's wings cut space more swiftly,
And too-one asks one-other: Is it true
That his fat can be reboned, and the skeleton
In his mother's thrice-killed womb 
Can emerge from a redemptive, ghostly gasp
Potentialized at last in motile flesh?
Can the refugee mother finally find a home,
The trump of her doom engorged with its own blast
Reversing its rage and ravaging its own brass?
When the son is two, the mother asks him
If he would change his gall to golden honey?
But the son ejects a NO from his sweet mouth,
And defiance births his first poem from that sound;
The sass of the self engenders the style of sex,
And the scriptured ear of mourning hears that dove
Which brooded through the night to throb her cooing,
And to turn the monster lurking beneath the bed
Into the mist of an innocuous story ... Tell me, 
Yes, tell me, tell me, lacerate me,
You monstrous devotions to flown angels,
I need to feel my breath as something more,
The someone who has turned her back on me,
Hidden like buried fire in the mountain,
The somespeak that words like love are always dousing.
Tell me what draws the snowmelt to the cenote
And always stokes one's thirst with whispering.
What is that shouting in the intimate distance?
The heated argument of tortured lovers?
The X in climax that splits the air with screams?
The feeling-rhythms pulsing far to near,
Approaching like an avenue of silence
Between the questions' and the answers' noise?
What is this beautiful intensity 
That seeks to find its equilibrium 
By stretching its extremes into confusion?
If it is harmony I seek, wherefore this howling,
This bestial storm which pacifies the gullet,
Yet wakes the sleeper drenched in perspiration?
Tell me, but please, please, tenderly, gently tell me,
The mind is tough, but not the child's heart.
Speak for this child so that his relic weeps.
Tears, ah, the tiny hydrospheres of tinier oceans
Salted with cleansing disappointments.  
The Epitheters now are periphrastars, 
And even if one could ferret out their names, 
And trace their bios to that moment's when, 
The women who wore them then are striped with age, 
The bones of no one there at all to speak of. 
The names alone remain, the named are gone,
The dust that dust mites graze on, nothing more.
And yet there comes a sigh from their thin aires,
A scented sigh, with thick ambrosias steeped,
And in the dead of night, Diviners hear:
How wrong, how right, how bright, oh spirit loves,
That you should breathe your tremulous words through me!

Canto XXV
Words, let me be a son to you, receiving 
The light of your ferocities, like thirst, like the vanity
Of collapsed vessels, like the leavings of a feast
Decimated by gross gourmands, wasps buzzing round
The gravies of spent blood.  Words, my alimentivorous mind
Seeks your sanguine digestions on four levels,
The last an opalescence more discreet than genitalian silence.
Words, be my heart's virtue, my animal sap,
The sponge of my ignorance, the spilled vase of cut flowers
On the denuded table.  Words, where your stinger
Is withdrawn, a mouthwound gapes in my granite wail,
And you exhale my poisons, pure as a mountain spring.
The green of the forest spreads its ocean
On my obsedian shore, completed as I have
Ever yet to be.  Words, I dilate, I distend,
I cry: I am your son, I remind you that the fant
In in-fant is Latintalk for one who wills to speak.
Words, I generate errors as an insect angel
Pullulates eyes and wings.  Words, you have 
Coagulated in me the rhizome of a brainclot;
You have prepared me for an unspeakable 
Philosophy; you light my skull with the wheel
Of the primaul mobile; you sweat my epidermis
With the wedding's wine; you spin my distaff's thread
Like the orb of the rising sun.  My mememory
You immortalize; my intellect you make marvelous;
Of my volitions you fashion miracles.  Words,
You syringe from the corpse of my lungs
The humid air, and bathe breath's droplets
With your slanting rays, my soul your rainbow
Arching with afterworld secrets.  In the mist
Surrounding and sounding my last breaths,
You make of my sputtering fire, immortal flames;
Of my putrecence you fashion irridescence;
Of tears, of sighs, you iris a brilliance more intricate than flesh,
More musical than circles of eternal laughter ...     
Suddenly injust this direst moment of Earthsuffering,
The rancid peace of the fewless bilkionaires 
And the agonies of the many slavies bilked 
Is refreshed by the exhales of the plague's deceased.
Now the green leaves relief their bliss to the reblued skies, 
As the death of human conmerce gives its dearths
To restore in full the breaths of trancehuman lives.
Resoundingly it's heard, this voice of grief,
Not by his fellow grievers, but by angels.
In quarantine, the quiet disquisition 
To entelechy serpentology 
Is less oracular than contemplations 
Of these hyperbolead celestial orders 
Sic passiming healing hoverings with virtual wings.
Arisings nullify gravity's enervant lacks!
Oppressions lame.  Oracles glorify yeses;
No's collapse.  The heavens in our notshalls
Star, and sing: Fast now on Facebalk,
Feast on our enchantings.  Count all our minease
Cavorting on your pinhead.  These prick
The timelessspaceless weights aground you.
The lead unlumps; the swarming choirs hymn:
So pass the flash, for crashsake,
You have been heaving it the wrong way round.
We only use the sHell of your mortal body
To remotely tour the three-D gravity will.
Inverse the flow of your umbilical,
And you will mate the operating angel ... 
Now, that's all very well and good, but 
I learned my phoodsloppily from ol Text Readder,
The one-footed smoker, who, trapped
Neath the mesh of the bode bog thicket, could hardly
Catch a whiff of sumplight, the vapors of his pipe,
The sole thing snaking between his swamp 
And heaven, and he, the Ph.D E-meritus
Of serpentology, was quite the arch-enemy
Of any ante-graveITy belling Angelus.  Jesus, he said
Ya caint talk back the dead, or drain the bledflow up
To sup brood dayflight, the matter's matter 
Is in and of itsef, Ipso facto ab absurdo, 
Orsumdinlikdhat ... I guess.  Well, after that 
(Sic) argumound, any embryonic metaphistic tyro
Is apt to be throne, his hope dominionated, 
His virtues unprincipltied of power, 
His innocent cherubic cheek serafamished 
Rite back to adomic dust mites, the hosts of Sod,
The Messianic message mutilated ... and yet ... and yes ...
IT may be that within this unsleptstate 
Resembling but half a sleep, you will begin to see, 
While still abet, lordlandscrys of a most spectacular nature,
Their substructured realness suggesting 
In hyper detail a place of wonder freed 
From cellular hunger, and made most moutainously
Fulfilling, like incommunicable poetry for the eyes.
Oh, you will rise and speak of this to others,
And they will say That's nice, as if to a child,
Which you could be again, a child burgeoning 
Out of Time's senescence, to bloom a parallel dimension, 
More real than real, with pristine puerness
Fulfilling every lack, as if the Omnipresent
Were a place specifically created for your joy.
Words, wounds, works, wails, worlds, all signs to be continued ...
The air inside your skull expands to sing:
You are an embryo of perfected blood,
Alive in the sac of a semensweetened ovum,
A fætal instigation bound for birth
Beyond the ken of anything mundane.
Tell me, ah, toll me, my other losteneers,
Do you, when you have stowed your pried Eartheyes,
Gracefully see your promise, as I've seen mine,
In this abiding infinite intimate?  
Do you dream of the deified someplace 
Belieing belief where no faith need preside
Because the miracles brightly manifest?
Have you been diagnosed by your fauxfriends:
Amorphous Neurological Giganticism, i.e, an ANG,
Encephillogically lacking, a piteable DiscantingDemiRat,
His visual-spatial-auditory syndrums
Making him socially so arrhythmutickle 
He missteps squawkingtalk as poetry.
In his weird world, tree is greater than sex,
And he makes interior invisibles of slights,
Saying in duncely duple-dropping tears:
I propagate love in images made, not scorned.
His minimusings, mutatingly mushroaming,
His claims (but we say falslely) are the wild
Determinants of ordinscary life
Invariably swarmed below the fickle surface.
Wards, wrecks, worms, whirls, writhes, 
Continuations never to be completed ...
When questioned, he refers you to the R.O.Y.,
The so-called Remotely Operating Yogi,
An obviously scamming fictionator,
Created to avoid suveillance, 
Any detection of his madness method 
Anathema to this evasive invasive.  
You won't know what he means until you're meant too.
His words would have you verily believe 
They are concrescently committed to your needs.
Whoever he says he is, he is, who listens,
A ceaselessly affirming source of love, 
A treasured souling wakening to a sleep
Beyond the second sleep of breathless death.
Renditions, redactions, rejuvenized replications ...
Oblations occultly oracularly occularized ... 
Yes yeses yeasaying the yonder yores of yes ... 
This demonangel would have the sick conceive
That they are interring intube a spiralled portal
Where all their matramonial lust of flames
Carouse in coital chastities of fire.    
Oh, but such flames, you say, suck all the air
Out of the lover's lungs.  When flames leap up
The tears go streaming down, danger
And joyousness spitting words in two,
And leaving the mortal vehicle exhausted.
The branchings are denuded of their green,
And the mountstainous dreamscapes,
Although magnificent, and studded 
With springfed cenotes, have yet to propagate
A single tree.  The Skeleton's poettree
Casts so little shade, that it gives no releaf,
Is not believed.  But no madder, the Other
Higher Orders are glistening in, and when Death
Stretches forth his brittle hand, they make
Most vitreous vessels of fingered mudras
Through which there flows fresh serums for new gardens ...
Of wondrous, witful, whirlabouting words.

Canto XXVI
Because I have not yet added the art of subtraction
To my countainearing decline, the steep seems 
Steepening near the naydears' summit, my consumations'
Summation, however aboutly to be ditched, 
However alleeringly readrusting, remains more lust,
Than love, less baptismal bathing than searing flaming,
My whole body a bonfear of releases, which honely
Prayerful meditations seem to squinch.
The question I hear when I close my ears to answers,
Is: Which do you love the most?  Your rusting limbs?
Or your lost's elimbinator?  That there are textual
Anomolies reliant for the exposition of their odors
On the post-sexth-ex-stinktion memories
Of the survivor readers is the faith fulfilled.
And if I tell these to-be thems, how common a sight
It was back then to see their smelly smushes
On the roads, skunks sows, I mean, in their
Springcrime migrations, arisen from their safe warrens,
Itching for sexual congress — the sniffing of vulvas, the nipping of necks —
To knowmad the byways where the hurtling machineries
Of automobilblitzers bashed them, kitless, to two dimensional carnage,
Their purefumes lacing the clumptry lairs for giles,
Their final stenches the politest of invitations,
As to a wedding, for the ladies-in-waiting vultures,
Engraved formall announcements, forever recognized
As such because their petitions for acceptance
Or regret are only etiquitte when addressed;
Requesting the the honour (spelled always
With the U) of your presence, and always propounded
In the ceremoniously correct passive tense unperson.
You doubt?  You marvel?  Don't.
The image is simple to consume: Red hats,
Black feathered dresses, a bevy of grave matrons,
In this time of bereavement, performing,
For the baffled bereavers, the skunk's lust stupor.
When supper's over, the maytrims sky,
These angelisized dishoverers of breath
Touring the unsquestered air, where here as now,
The postextinctionears read: Faith is fulfilled.
Look, Fewcheerears, I know I have fallen a few steeps 
Behind my maestrodes, but still I fear my readdears
Lag in arrears.  A fornicator's questions lead my strives:
How is it possible for vegestative sponges
To disgorge finger legs, and lung their gills
With formatative tongues?  And how do
Dust-forged tongues hunk from afamerable air 
Lovecantickles less mortal than their lusts?
Listen: I hear too smush.  Recently I have been farced
To invest in a technology which emits frequencies
To neutralize the holy howling of orphaned
Mountainmetals slaving in machinereries
To cut the heads off shrubberies, for we
Shackwood hellbellies jawdrop droolingly
At the awesome regularities of adblurbia,
And we crap completely when plodting the city grids.
I want that, we say, not seeing how the master baitors
Have hooked us in our shamed parts, and taken,
By plague, our plangent breaths away.
The goal of these News styles is to develop
Two-dimentionable madterials, which are a swindle
Adomic layer thick, and by means of more 
Sophisticated transresistering conjugate
Polypoetries with deeper lattice symmetries,
Thereby furthering insights — as if! — into the strictures
Of Almighty Glob, which is, as the ad verseceasars say,
Every whingerway we look and have to hear: 
The Damned's lust strAwe.  Come on, you carp,
I am here now, as you were there then, how can
You see the words in Time's one rhyme
Criss-crossing in their seasonal migrations
When there's a summer's scorchings stretched between them?
To which mobjections, I surplice one garment, fitted
To clothe our duple-cloistered doubts.  You say I'm dead,
And I say You're unborn.  But Who says what or when
Without this breath whose bodiless dimensions
Knit all forms with moiré weavings more undulant
Than the seas.  Well, well, that's a pretty silky answer,
Swaddleshroud, did you Eve that in a look?  Y knot?
Should I not brave fire with millinary accoutrements,
As freely as do those hellsmutheaded aggrandizers
Puff with military deficiencies?  Why should this man
To that woman, that man to this man, or that woman
In that wouldn't row bend their lover around an e-post
And call that lovelessness a poem?  Now please, calm down.
And say why you are mortified by my mere tasking?
Aren't there I-tale-yarns enough to go a sound?
Bene.  L'altro pomeriggio dal mio lettino, 
Ho visto il mostro con troppe lingue ... see, now,
How beautiful fear becomes when it finds 
How the crytalized serpent speaks to no one?
How the moanstar beneath the bed turns glistening angel
By just one lingtwist of the kaleidoscope?  Feel how
The multihued diamonds gleam and tumble.
These little mouths on paper should not be considered
Miniature langlish proverbs, rather they pose
As dramas, performers in an alien theater,
Who masque enticingly through flames of shame.
They are abstractions' portraits melding old age
And infancy in mirrors with polyglot rapturous gestures
Of stylized love.  You mean they're poems?
I prefer to call them st'earts that will prevail
When material matters are whelmed in death's destructions.
I prefer to call them optimal optimisms,
Though they strife as often as Lot with sharp salt swives.
I speak no dialectics, expound no dissertations,
The idea of evolution is as ridiculous as the idea of creation — 
As ideas.  Let me pontificate: Such pluerosities are porus,
The most everlusting and poignant of my queries
Are divinely evanescent, yet as saltdid as pillars of sold.
If the annilation of the world in a daily briefing
Is only another of the last trump's jokes,
Who would be left to laugh?  I have in my possession
Bungles of skyhooks, from which I hang my entire imaginocean.
And from which I net nothing, another humble frisker
Of fishy men.  Bene, ancora, I nap in the afterswoon,
As if it were night's last mourning.  And with all
The ease of knifing the pascal lamb, I subtract
From declining steepness the slide of sleep.
My one hand washes the other out of existence.
And both are as clean as a cemetarian's whistle.
My tune of darkness sinks like a flickering light
Down to the depths of the deepest ocean trench,
One tooth in that grin igniting the abyss,
And a very teenie tiny tooth at that.  No matter 
Mother, no vaporous Vater, I am what I say I am,
And no thing more.  Most would have thought
That the silence tailing my speech would be
The end of me, but that's not sow.  EveInn
My muted musesings are as fertile
As spontaneous generation in a puddle.
MaggotyMAGAMugWump!  What are you saying!?
I am saying, Though arms' alarms are swarming through our frights,
The muddle clears.  The gait that breaches Time through timelessness,
Though sweating with humiliating glans, cannot prevert
Idolators from praying.  Though speeches castigate,
Their words stray pure.  Embrace your superstitions
As an essence, their kissing pacifies the warring clans.

Canto XXVII
Peaces of tunes tooted through an E-boney clearanet
By a jawless joyless angelic Vain-in-ease Jew 
Whose cigar, smoking its Sea-scales below the surface, 
Is only a cigar ... a fatal, yet unserious cancergrowth, a minor 
Midnight miner dug down, duped deep, done in.  But for battered or for worse, 
You keep trying, keep trying to think, to think that you know better.
Now do you understand why some surrender their corporeal courses
When the joke has gone too far, and the toy spawns pain?
Rubble literature, celestial judgements torching
Fire storms, the lusters' bodies uncharitably charred, 
All those bombed broken bits of traumatic memories 
Piled beyond the outskirts of the city 
Are coverted with turf, hillparks on the germain plain,
With Jung gall gems for all oblivion's children.
If you remember rightly, childhood masked the monstrous,
Extracting delight from squishing lightning bugs.  
There was always a hint of holocaust in the guiltloost, 
A tinge of happy cruelty in your play, 
A seed of mechanical spleen invoking glee.
Oh, IT so truly wasn't true: Work did not make you 
Any more free than shirk.  Exhausted, incoma-ed,
You don't know what to do.  That was your worst mistake,
You made your first step backwards, and the weight
Of your waiting broke the softspined deck
Of that slinking Flaying Ditchman, and drown you went,
Your blueflame seeking a drench in I SEE whaters —
Your seeded blood — this grave of all Earth's rivers —
Your voluminous-making Mother of Time's umbilicles,
Netting you in leviathan's labyrêves. 
The relic down here is enormous, the titanic marvel
Of a high-end sunk-in city, all of its red veilvet
And fluted guilted ornaments salted with human 
Remains — videlicet —  those remaimbered privileged
Who should have been forgotten, their haughty
Skulldruggeries News-polished to two-bit leerer-than-life
Infamies relegated here to the putrid little criminal pigMes
That they perpittraitored, bound down whored in these blurried depths,
Where yourtiny blueflit finds them.  As you tour their
Coffincabins' palatial-plush-sumptuous-exorbitant-hedonistic-
Extravagantly-lavish-opulantly-garish-posh-vulgarities
As facilelyfascinated as any fish-eyed alien reptide
Is apt to fundamentally be, you bubble:  But it's all so babblously hollow —
Also shagged with dreadful draperies of seakruft
Where through-flashing schools of ignorant minNows
Are ever everywitchaway startling the seeker,
Who, breathless and sleepless, does not know what to do.
So here you are, at the bottom of your jar,
What a ghostly way to mind out who you are ... blown
From the blackbell of a ghastly planchant wouldwin ... toot ... 
Moot said what?  In this underwreckage one plus one
Equals one, a strange equation, but it's the only one
Whose solitudinous fires can sprout the one
Whose endogenous lumination can light these pressures
Born in the crushing darknesseas of old.  Your second
Mistake was to wretchedly assume some seperateness
Of time or space in sorrow.  You deduped that one
Plus sum, must always be too.  But see how
Corrupt it is to smoke and croak and soak and choke and woke
On the Koching stench of your own jokeburnt flesh, 
While you are drowning in a slough of tears.
It may all happen as simultaneously 
As sleep and dream erupt from sleeplessness,
Until the wretched sum of the evasion cries
From the form-crushingfire: OH Farther,
Can't you see that I am churning!  And that
Is how the third step conjugates the involutional
Dilerium of never knowing what to do.
This sudden impasse moves the diaphram,
Downblicks the eyes in inward viewed saccadings, 
It all must happen automatically, until ... ?
Until a mite of a dot amygda-gayling
From deep in the supraoptic nucletrist
Unsleeps, like a nut in the soil
At the base of the skull, and sometimes
The hand that can —  and who now wills to —
Knows what to do, and turns the damned thing off.
Before, your thinking and feeling were doing you,
And now, in a lovely turn, you're doing them,
And it's all happening autovolitionally. 
It feels like you're greating close now to finally Being
Completely out of your classlessly ruined mind,
But there seems one final wall of calcified embers
Burning between your terror and your freedom,
And that might be enough of a recoil
To cook your flash to ashes.  What do you do?
The nerve-winged insexed that you have been
Has never passed beyond the pupal stage,
Most of which time — a period of eons —
Was spent as an indeveloped mentell larva
Burrowing blindly beneath the funereal bark
Of a legrubbing language of knellish stridulations
From a mantis prophetess, whose mandible-grasping vulva
And long invisible antennea have stoked the fires
Of your beast desires.  Whatever friend you made
Of kitinous reason bids you a bittersweat adieu,
Which hollows out your thorax for a heart.
You have wrestled all your lives with this one passion —
To find your apocalyptic acropolis restored 
As the protectress of that city, which raises
The serenest inviolability above the barbarous
Savagry of your longings.  And now she's near,
A scant light on the shanks of your old ramble,
Who promises a migraine for that Fathead, 
Who thought his thoughts those of the only God.
Will you fall asleep on the steeps of her coitadell?
And if you succumb? will you dream of a landscape of stone,
Of her bones too nakedly flensed of representation
To exist as anything more than a textual virgin,
Forever to be pursued but never touched,
Forever to baffle you in baffling canyons,
Half built of male ambition, and half of the process
Of a beautiful yet indifferent evolution,
Which promises awe but not the garden's bliss,
A palpitation of endless side-effects, but never
The cushy flesh of a final fulfillment?
Each piece of rubble bore one hard inscription:
Through pain I find an adamantleavey truth.
So now the gravel of gravitation's garble
Reverts to the grandeur and silence 
Of mountain on mountain, resolving
Your errors in magnificent quietude.
An inexplicable desert for all exiles,
A nomad's home in a cave of purrPetuall calm,
Where the deniZens of the wild all whishpurr: Peace.
Lottsa jerky gyrations as you jitter down to sleep,
The desert jackels joking their distractions,
Jump here, juke there, let the jericho jivings
Jumble up your frights, as the night grows cool
With the licorice gobstick's sighs fountaining ebony
Sugar from night's slate slit.  Notes glimmer as the faces
Of big stars, their tune enough to turn a beast angelic.
Just close your eyes, and hear the duplayed-rhythms,
The childking of the mountain's architectures
Aslumber in this ancienttest of temples;
The serpent's motoring cortex, the jackel's 
Mammalrages, the chalice of dialectical
Compeers, the image, the symbolicall concentration,
The lotus brainrefrain: MytermMightturn! 
Releasing from the densified physical organs
That gold ægyptical flow of synergies,
That permanent moment acausally effecting
The power of the unseen referent.
If it is miracle you seek, here it blooms:
The newgrowth of its cosmos cured by pain,
Bursting cool greens right out of crimson flames.
Beauteous beauty contemplating love
Has moved inside you as a dawnbred dream.
Insomnia's passionate combats, though long and hard,
Are pocketed like tears inside a calyx,
Lillied with pascal promise, dazzled with dew.
The whole of your crisis collapses to one center,
Where the yielding quality of yieldingness,
Disperses your diseases in a breeze,
Which steals its strength from the discipline of ease.
Don't do what you want, but love what you have to do.

Canto XXVIII
Ah, do you think it's possible that I am only wishing,
And that this aging era flowing through is only an interim
Interpretation becauase of an indigestiable nebula
That had to come in Time's due dinnercourse to a suspended
Animation, which might as well be in Eden as anywhere,
Because such circulating circulations are immutable —
Like bees in flowers and brides in trees, and so froth,

Because in all that motion there must be a pause
Where He waits, like a skeleton on the twiggy nest of his last forbleeding love?
Like a skeleton?  Yes, because — Lethe drunk — he has forgotten
His former lusts, has no more stomach for his erstwhile gluttonies,
And is as sleepless as panoptic Argus.  He wastes.  He wants.  Yet he is satisfied.
He lives in solitude, and is happy to do so.  His ocular sockets are eyeless 
Of avarice or envy.  He views, from his perch above the forest's rhyme evil, 
A world of pain and injustice, yet, flensed by fire, 
Wrath cannot char his heart.  He sings with nothing to say,
And he waits.  He waits as prideless as any paper lion, 
Insomnia's uncrowned king, he waits for the Everlasting 
To flex his bilious beak with new immutabilities.
He has become the amalgamated being, more impossible
Than the gryffun, and as unimaginable as human happiness. 
Trashmaster, he has concocted his Eden out of Hell's 
Still smoking innards, and he waits, he waits, 
Purging and preening his bipedal featherless bones
For the felicitous flight of the alone to the alone.
To house the eternal relic of his tongue, with cunning workmanship,
The worshipful have filigreed an ark 
Of every noble metal's scenes of gold,
And this they bestud with myriad precious jewels.
Because that tongue, in the hovel of its desert,
Has licked the serpent, as a she-bear licks her cubs,
Into the shape of a gratifying angel.  On feast days
The angel sings the heart of the world,
And the people wallow in wonder. They enshrine
His words in The Book of the Dead Restarred,
And from that book they read of their salvation.
It was not a likely, but a loving story.  
The scriptures of a sensory paradise require no belief,
Because — because they are lived.  Namely, to wit's last gambit:
Life is light.  Host sang that?  A little weirdy tolled me,
This brightly fathered master of torture's machinery,
Slime of the ancient harmonious sun, oiling the News' daze
With the deaths of the old marinators in honor
Of the defeat of toil and of the resurrection of convenience.
No matter, a childlike curiosity has reimmersified
All that rattling roaring into a past oral symphony,
And the why that was a wrangle has become a fruitful way
To entangle the twin sides of the aquaviva with just 
Enough flowing to instill the distance with a heavenly
Appreciation of the new one for the nude one.
Here is beauty beclothing herself in garlands,
Blossoms forever forgiving their petals to adorn
The chased with chastity.  Lovely.  Lovely. 
The hectic speed of your ascent has resolved
Into the peace of High Plateau.  It had been sought for,
But not expected, all your formerly fearful longing
Felicified in a floating innocence, the trance lucent foliage
Exuberant with the clarity of its own abundances,
Sinuous vineries, silicanoodling to planer gleamings,
Their invisible internal chemistrees windvisibly shimmering
In breezing melodiousnests concordantly 
Contrapunctelling al frescale awe capellasingings,
All your unspoken silences expressing bliss.
It is new appeasingly parent that wee minors have come
Now to the plea saunter part of the heartmined
Of the lighterside of Glad, a place of beatified rest,
And if you have the heart to not keep doing that's this,
You may just stop erratically spinning and justly 
Adopt to these more endlessly fascinating wise to spin,
For there is no more perfect plays to simply look and listen,
Than this first where where you again begin.  And yet, yes, yes,
Here stilly retrains sweet mysteries, as in such stumpers as:
How does such joyful variety remain so constant,
Your weird wired whys spectacularizing into brighter questshrines?
How do these lovely gaps in the shimmering finish
Open to finishes fair more shimmering yet?  Here dark
Is only a space where light may pillow
To dream of raising billows of light amain, 
Its seas of beauty teeming with freshening forms.
We eat through the eyes, and the stomach finds
Its culinary aspirations filled by the taste on the tongue
Of appreciation, the old robotic digestion made quite moot
By contemplation's wasteless nourishment.
Are you surprised?  How so?  All lovers know the belov'd
Is a feast for the eyes, and grow lean looking at a-ascetical
Aesthetics, luxury, their appetite's only antidote.
Are you ready?  Would like to see how to listen
To how I came to meet her?  The inner light of her form
Rayed out to meet the outer morn of day's illumination,
So that along the mating surface of that meeting
Delight smoothed creamy ecstasies.  She was
The eveling of innocence re-dewing freshling flowers
In festoons for her radiating body.  One could choose chance
Wisely in the wonder of her eyes.  And so I did,
Ending those long sober discussions in which
The now silent, and soon to be assimilated,  
Other 2/3rds of this assignation had tried to 
Invigorate me into embracing the formalities
Of a poetry the imagery of whose merits
Lacked that little precious destitution
Which breezes fully fledge as love.
All those heart-throbbing veins and arteries,
Which had turned into pillars of salt,
Now flit through the free of the air like feathered song.
This song, the icon of my knowmad knave,
Glows like a candle's column through my brain,
My caravans of chants and forest trees 
Moving about like pious-pacing pilgrims
Beneath star-chandeliers of soaring size,
Embellished by gilding, and glistening with the sun, 
Cupped to the brim and past in shadeblue glass.
I'm as thick as a man spun from the silks of rainbows, 
The joy of my devotion, a comprehensive unity uniting
All minute communities of apolitical proprieties 
Into the Nature-commune of contemplation.  I have mediated
The nexus of all labor in my leisurely linkages of modes,
And have consummated all disagreeable I's into one wee point
Of aproposals.  I have rejected the privileges of possession
In favor of inexplicable perplexities.  My prayers
Give no great consolations, but I flatter my spousals
With my admission of contradictory principles,
More magnificent in their absurdities than Solomon’s 
Lexicometrical Temple, where no words sing.
Still, I admit, at times, at night, when sleepless,
I revisit my old earthwormy family's uglies,
Who blankly squirm under the dirt of heaven.
How dull their thereness is, converting all the diseases
Of the body by means of a horrible intestinal peristalsis,
And yet the songs aloft can twirl them involutionally
To the surface, where sunlight shrivels, beaked birdwords gobble,
And the dull simplicity of their one tube of pain
Opens its pip to pipe a little crude into the OmniOm
Which booms Creation.  I don't need to tell you
About fear, we are all quite adept at receiving 
Terror's blessings.  But grant me this aside:
And pondirt the fate of that Zeney patriarch, 
Who stood on his head to die,
His saffron robe all bunched aground his eyes,
His genitals windily flapping in their skin, his final Quatz!
Barefooting Pureland skies, his posture the eloquence
Of this sacred hymn: Not every fool with two legs
Is a youman.  The calipers which measure low to high
Collapse to jokery in his timeless laugh.  What?
Not what, but who.  You don't have to know 
How it works in order to work it.  The ghost 
In the machine will do that.  The green ghost,
Sometimes, or the golden one, or the one
Shaped like the woman in your dreams —
She who is finer then the fluffy cerulean powder
That colors a supercelestial butterfly's wings.  Yes.
Guess.  Only consider that the hyperdimensional 
Loves best when love is beautifully uncontrolled,
As free to flit as breezes in the leaves, 
And as soft to hum as a bobbing bumblebee 
Megafunning the sweet of her buzzed joy 
From the trump of a calla Lilly’s calyx.
Go ahead, rest, your mass will not unravel 
If your intenser stress eases itself in forrest pleasantness.
It is a long time yet before your item may be atomized.
And yet it invites, this shade, that blocks the light,
A smiling glittering herethere on the waters,
Appreciating with a quiet genius,
The dark adversities of this fouling age.   

Canto XXIX
The other-wowwhirldly has allwheeze about it 
Something of the hyperdimensional theatrical,
The mortal flickerings of mundane cancestir terrors,
Pulsing from the pairawwhineneum's acorn, and re-minding us
Of the old Druidic he-brew for the Oaken forRestKing.
This one, Hight Daleth, meming adore, is a rite of pastoral pastage,
Where the body's wavering wobblinest 
Follows an harmonious Erotical innocence,
Dunce to dance, enthralled by sumher's beauty
And her beauteous song, along and against
The purest of life's streams inside the conjugational spine.
Lit twists, this current, in serpentine fashion,
Its waters braided in cadewsheus freshness,
And from the meadowy opening of its pleasage,
Ahead, we see them —  His mighty breathing fOaks,
The colossal presenses, at last alit with sunsoak's
Golden dawn or guilted Eveling, his seven sisstars, whose flickering
Leafearing majesties speed our adomic breaths,
And turn our streamy incites to metavision.
However have we cum from dalethdealing there
To livinglovely here along the line of these timeslew'd
Rites of procession?  So much Oh!curing in this radiant space
Between the lightning and the thunderclap.
The audience, applauding, is lightwise like enthralled.  The prison 
Wails the sighs of prism-skies, and in those ever-glowing
Iris-archings, the mob parade of corpuscular balloons —
Jostling all frets in childish senescence — resolve to lines
Of stately coupled elders, the grown-ups, whose lilly-haired
Dauntless courage, presages yet more wonders to betold.
These are the Just, up-standing even before that in was sadly prefaced.
Clearly, you must have seen them, one solemnly
Mirroring his other, peered bright/dark, each with their own 
Full pearlset of trustworthy teeth, each tooth
Connected to its own great epochall channel,
And each aboth abreast beneath those banners
Of everastralstreaminggladbrainbows.
They chant with gravelty-defiling voices: Remember
The acolites HERmighting in the desert, how all their
Devlish madness coalesced us.  And thus 
Their healing aires go rumbling down to penetrate
The grossness of your body, and luminate
Its dense nest of disease.   I tell you, I have seen
Inside their palimcestual parchmeants, where,
Beneath those antique skins, were medusa organs
Of puerest clearness, all perfectly performing
Their rhythmic functions, and there, I percieved
The purity of Number, whose skeletal arrangements
Pulse cure joy.  These array the roiling swarmings
With proportionalities, which collate the complexities
Into living hybrid harmonies, where all that we might
Have become becomes what we are, the sum of us
Shouting in awe: Oh Wholely Holey!   When you lion
The reflections of that stream, your leftwings flight
Right eagleword to heaven, so many momentary
Amalgamations, shimmering firewater through earth's air! 
And yet, poor aging human, as great as these things are,
And as abundant, being notoriously ephemirr'r electrically
Uninuclear to recite inverse's necronightly O's,
They come by chancey mercies, unmerited, seen only
By the eye with ears to ear, smiles barebrightly visible
As quicklime Time.  And where is the poet
Cerubicably cheeky enough to man up 
For these oxygenated plea gals?  He would have to have
A hundred sight-sped touches to prophetize
The spinning of these reels.  Their very dazzle
Would no doubt do him in.  Yet, these triumphal
Spectacles, in order to count the colossus
Of their impact, must of necessity exceed the magnitude
Of the entire planetary domicile of the celebrant, 
Which explains why the poet remains so immotive
Even as the poetry transcends the speed of light.
The photonic varnish on this vehicle outstrips
The eye's capacity to see, and yet is held in stasis
By the mind.  The finer delinations of these creature's
Features lie inconveniently beyond the littered letters,
And have the transtrusive importunity
To deflate the swollen purse of the culllectors,
Who invariably discover that they are primarily
Reflective of their stares.  We cannot overstress
Just how clear these ambiguities must be:
Colors, colors galore, the lore of colors gloried
In glorios, just as you would expect of the stupifying.
When the Bookman sticksin his nose
From these higher dimensions, that light
Wrecks the surface of your perceptions,
And numeric certainties ride on yes/no guesswork.
Such chariots are so highly hurrahingly ordered
Their brightness breeds a chaos in the mind,
The temporal pooling in the visual, where ordinary
Seaing drowns.  Helical hexigonal mirrors
Babbel: What of it? to the baffled ears,
Still from this hear we cannot look away,
Its hypnos magetizes iron wills.  But was it
Really there or briefly there, or ever still?  Because,
The most distinctive feature of the procession
Was its temporal elusiveness:  Was it fast or slow?
Were you moved or straying?  Yet the next time
You go to read it, the page is blank, while still the tongue
May taste among its papillae the sounds of a language
Far older than its words.  Now, if we have properly
Calculated the infinity of our wishlessness,
We may begin that slow tumbling wherein
The slender tentacles of the heart can sense,
In that somewhere at the center's apeX,
The love we have always longed for — What
Awaits?  Engenders awe?  Kills words to savor silence?
Pulps form to free pure light?  Suspended 
In these questionings, we wait.  We wait.  We drift.  We tumble.
We watch through the rainbow sights of the procession,
And wonder: Is this a wedding or awake?
The solemnity of the pacing suggests a veil,
A wisdom of starsparks clarifying roses
Too pure for any doomed by history.  Can the varied air
Be glittering with diamonds? or is this the dust 
Of a permeating magus, whose manyness
Glittered in our alphabetic numbers, like a father,
Promised in an absent touch, the terrible power
Of which crushed mother's love — his joy
Too mighty to be named as such, and yet, unnamed,
It animates the tongue with Cabbalahs sheathing
Their own ecstasies.  This, we had not expected,
A land of sudden reversals, where the hands
Of clocks that had clicked in one direction,
Convert into pullulating wings, each wing
Wild fortune's wondrous whirraculous wind,
Bull-roarer in the resonating cavern, saying:
Darkness is No thing, and its night disperses
As soon as the rays of dawn have pierced its heart.
The beginning of the procession becomes its end,
And the grave, dry stick which is shedding dust to earth
Is a seed that bursts from dirt with greening joy.   
AH, this is also too disquietly in-chanting ...
Yet, isn't it all like an old man's conversation,
Which broaches, with every breach of silken silence,
This curious sobsubject of the leer?

Canto XXX
Roy, Roy Dean, Roy Dean Doughty ... the voice
Slides across that slicked uncrossable river — 
Slow, brown, hotly leglessly slithering
Through that Big Thicket to the talksick sea ... O,
What strange creatures breed beneath those waters,
Primitive thrownbacks, scaley, ravanous, toothy,
Cretanous pernium paleohallucinocambrium textalkculars, 
Hugely symbolic in their bladderous shadowy way,
Unvisualizable monstares more immortal 
Than the crushed crystals of fiery distant stars, of which
Their bodies are shardly D-composed,
And the river itself, thick, opaque, only
A sinuous sleeze of oppressive wronglight,
Where some too familiar reflection is slidingly sheened ... 
Could it be he who is summoned?  But what are those
Numbered bubblings, the three, the four, the seven,
With their generations of looncyles in their mouthlies
Which, for all their highnoon maskyourleeraties,
Trying to sonnetized their lusts into civile affections,
Trying to fourk two gether those three tinies, but instead 
Finding slyheat's frights boiling census down to five —
Sacred pentagram of the magus Grandfather, whose
Coyote voice might be this gravelly calling:
Roy, Roy Dean, Roy Dean Doughty ... and you remember him —
Your gone Grand Farther, his violent strength, 
Quiet as any volcano before its kinsackrupts, 
Buiding a survivalist's mountain
Where there was only single-sell plaindealing, 
Not even so complex as a bisexed coupling,
Replaced by his compleacratered need to rut, 
Cunning, ruthless, covetous of his own, the black
Before the bang, with the kundalini spinetie at his neck,
Its ruby-headed serpent at his throat, repleading,
Through the baffling veg-Iration, this grave-call, growling,
Ever more boulderous, and rolling its thunderous rumblings
Across the shuddering crush of featureless skies,
Which pound down heat like a lung oppressing disease: 
Roy, Roy Dean, Roy Dean Doughty.  
And you think: Who could that be?
Never heard of 'em, don't know 'em, and don't care to.
One of the wedding guests who would knot come in,
Old deoxyribonucleic acid weaving his serpent sounds
Through the thorny thicket to find another devil's advocate.
Never heard of 'em, don't know 'em, couldn't dare to.
Still there is something curious about those sounds.
They unwrinkle the reflection of hego, 
Sluffing atrociously atop the waters,
They smooth the features into porcelain, as polished
As a napponese geisha's pearlfix, 
A softening of the domineering male,
As if Death were the magus's last trick, 
The one with nothing up or down his sleeve, 
A conjuration, like an incantation,
An abracababra out of empty air, 
That makes all survivalist machinations moot.  
A face with bluesky eyes, and gaitor mouth,
And ears like lizard flaps that catch all cries,
And veins that throb across a gleaning forgehead,
With that old priapian intelligence 
Which breeds its raptor violence with the gentlest doves.
It is mourning, the voice, it is Morning.  
And these sounds that lumber through those thickset trees
Are the sounds of the industructable wrecked by sobs.
In an instant the lienes' horizons sprout red flames,
And the day burns down in a sudden revelation:
You were to be the groom in that shunned wedding.
You, who could hardly bear to be womanborn,
Arriving in puny underdevelopment, you, who have lived
So long, misunderstanding, you, who have ruthlessly 
Prodded your anima saviors 
With your pitiful panile answers.
You find yourself mad for the breath you first rejected,
As lonely as a humouse lost in owlsight, awaiting,
With jeer and dissembling, the bite of her talons.
The three, the four, the seven, the pentagroan,
Will they ever renoun again when the breath is gone,
And the music is only the skeletale ghost of numbers,
Pouring deep silence through the eon's cathedrals,
An organtone grown bubbly babellloss
In the quietous burgeonings of afterfoam?
It is time to think about crossing that wide whater,
For water unites the disparate, 'though she splinters illusions.
It is time to consider those myriad crucifictions
That the thorns of this complex thicket promise you.
It is time to step through this vicious sawtooth trap 
That severes the gnawed left foot of every poem.
What!  Could there be a through through those brash barbarous barbs 
Of effortnightlynightprick torn tormentings?
Could there be a there there with numberlessnourhising fruits 
From a vary different kind of kin of forest,
Where every exiled nomad finds a home?
Oh lamb, who thirsts so for the you's sweet teat,
Have you mistook this butcher's bludgeoning
For the milky siren of your motherly's bleating?
Consider the risk you take if you are wronged.
Have ewe perchance so terribly miscomprehended
That the spoused-named corpse in her yurn
Of crystal quartz, is either an incorruptable source
Of health or a prostituted relic of malfeasance,
Working a spell again on genitals disabled by grave age,
And utterlessly UnAbel to gene a germ?  
Yet still, one imagines, that dead hand flexible, unrigormortared,
After all these eons, and elevated in perpetual blessing.
One trusts one's incapacities too much,
And these bipolar doubts do ghostily metamortally paralyze.
You might still do deeds as simple as falling adream,
And see the peecocked porcelain shimmering princess,
Her accurarity's irised saving gaze, misting its rainbows
Through your opacities, and making your deadness
Spiral from its grave.  The five might be a six,
If senses grew like thorns in that Big Thicket,
And the skeletal dummy, fat-stuffed to corpsoulence,
That holy non-professional somnambulist,
Might journey sea-sick over foreign oceans,
And see that Syble bearded by a veil,
Who heals all ailments by her admonisions.
Of course, odd course, why hadn't we believed
That any lack-of-patience on the couch 
Is likely prey to intrapsychic visions, 
So all his errant fantaseeus come
In the cuddly forms of troubadorean Sadies,
Sophias of deep knowledge redrobed in scorn.
But, alas, a last, such thinking is an isolating business.
So many cycles of seconds spawn a name,
Which drowns its sound in heavy seas of meaning.
Thus interest deviates away from breath,
Wholely imprisoned in death's dull breathlessness.
But still, the imagination, bereft of spirit,
Must be attended, a vexing invalid mistress,
Who never comandeered our languid love.
Neither pious indignation nor cynical pleasure
Can alter our circumnambupoorus grovelings
Around this worshipped Kaaba stoned into fact.
The passion that breeds compassion is just not there.
There is a glitch in the system, what to do?
Report or ignore the error?  The shapes of the letters
Do not enhance recall, these musics for the eyes
Must be re-membered.  The pump in the chest
Is not the thing we sing of, which measures
Every loss and gain with fret.  Let stasis surrender
To its own stagnation, forbye such friction
All of the muddy graves, which riddle Earth,  
Can burst in fires of jubilant inspiration.
Forgive.  Forget.  You may.  Such grace is balm,
Not subject to volition's unjust justice.
No dialocktalk can be cracked or broken, unless those
Diamonnetted tears from heaven
Plumbet to hell and break the hard heart too.
No star-crossed lover ever bleats this cheat:
A rose by any nether smells as sweet. 

Canto XXXI
The heart, overbloated with remorsefilled reammindessence,
And pierced by its own hand's skullpall, bursts bogus bogs
Of babelous emotions, read for the thrust of the flood's intencities
Of ragefaultlteariflaying gushes, pains much preferred,
For all their fatal rushes, to the intoreableed 
Colddarkpressures of stagNation ... and the sad, sad
Part of the pain of this de-sanguination,
Is that this thin sicksackskin reseals doublequick,
And the torment, rebloated, stabs itself again,
The prod cess repleaded because it brings relief,
As death brings such to the dis-eased and hurt,
So that that devil, devoted to reprediction,
Grins, and sucks the blood, with joy obeast.
When the heart speaks of these Satanic needs,
The crime's sum deepens to dreadfilled crimp'dson, 
And the circulating pump — the story revolving
Redonedants with know resolutions —
Becomes a formless spattering of floes — as if
This first contrition's victory was over life itself,
Its piercing sorrow, a summoning return,
Not to some paradicecal innocence, but to original
Without-form-and-void, the preconception chaos
Of pre-screach. Time is dismembered and space is
Irrelevented, and all those splattereads drifting 
Through blackhavoc, crystal a jumbled cacaphony
Of cries, but not a word is heard through all that noise,
Until the penitent leaks through tremulous lips,
Those doublesharpened syllables meaning: Sorry.
But sorry, precisely for what? and whome 
Is the contrition meant to salve?  Those questions
Star the air with burning cells, arranging themselves
In corridors of ice, and sounding circularities of circuits,
All ears to resound the renoun of the penitent,
Who has made himself foamous for all the pain he's caused.
The connecting tissues' tensions become too great,
And the trillions of cells colluding to make a body, 
Crack with one cracking which conjugate one thunder,
So that all that remains of that one word's dimensions
Are the quavering shapes of lips that breathe no sound.
Contrition's cacanation has birthed confession,
And Time resumes, 'though not as arrowflight,
But volumized in spheres of spreading light,
Wherein Edenic spaces whirl new worlds.
New Heres are crystalized through these ill lipses,
But the body of mud that ate the blood of others
Cannot subsist upon these realms of light ... unless ... until ... 
The lust of knows are reconcieved as guesses.
Yet the guesstions remain like the ghost of a wafting scent.
How many tears will be sown before this yes
Negates the nose that fearamoans this stench?
If odor fog is becoming a flurry of flowers, 
What entity perfuming through this procession
Appears to prompt the celebrants' elations?
Often enough you met her in the flash,
But you degraded her body into flesh,
Allured by the grosser shine of skinsheened sex,
Which bloodymudded the subtlety of spirit ... 
The one path forked, and in that fork you stuck,
Your prod a source of Maya-lies and tears ... 
And from that rock this river of remorse
Is what I call upon your breath to drink.
One drop of blood stains all such genital waters,
Betokening chancestirrings of mad Death,
And worse than Death, a plethora of pain.
My joy is ever nude, naïve, and pure,
And you must chant it through your cancerlust,
To reinvigorate our sacred nuptials.  Hear me,
And chant your answer, sing: Joy!  Joy!
Hear how my Her, in the hereness of this choice,
Cleanses your flesh of fears, and breathes: Forget.
Swallow medicinal whaters, drown your fleazings,
Why let communibreeds of pairasights
Bedull the bedazzle of your bridegroom kingdom?
You can't say Won without my Solebright too.
Your Negativa's millennia of minutes
Is killed the instant that you save no seconds.
Ah, me, but I am twinned, one twin a trickster.
These rocks from which my wasted waters spring
Are the bones of my physical body, which I love,
Although they generate a load of loathings.
Your word Forget is like a grinding fire
That granulates this mountanous moan of Self,
And turns the grindings into river silt,
Tumbling about in anonymity, forgetful, yes,
But also, saidly, forgotten.  These tears that gush
From me, stained by my blood, are selffresh rushes
Of nonarioty for that notorious mountain's nebulization.
If I am No One, I am not your bridegroom.
Our die-eclectic means that I must die,
My trickster camouflaging as a bride,
Bright to confine my body in her prism,
That ancient rainbow serpent in my spine,
Rising to spit Plutonus in my brain,
Who poisons all my dear identities.
Listen, my Blankness, and hear what these words
Propher.  Be now the first in the history
Of your world to defy the mandates of old Mortality,
He only wants to be asked and he'll admit:
I am is the simple prefix witch transforms me.
You think this linkage requires a miracle,
Or that adding that to this will spark no change,
But all the Rabbis steeped in kabbalisms
Sing how our letterarery permutations
Give Death destruction in these marriage vows.
Just see what a strange new Christis draws you forth,
A creature of wheels and colors and incarnations,
Whose momentary shapes lightning the I
With that which most astonishingly glories.
The vision speaks with words from your own mouth,
And what it says without the need to speak is IS:
This Epic poemsecretion is no mere epifeemystical re-de-
Flexion: It is Creation's living consumation,
ITs lovers linking letters to light their love.
Re-member No-thing, but due don the crimson shroud,
Whose woven pressures vapor the whater's waits.
When you cum to the lightside of my further shore,
You clothe your nakedness in robes of freedom.
Now tell me, rive-er blubberer, what have you learned?
This is the learning, which to you I proffer: 
To offer love's sweet reconciliation 
To all your infant waywords,
But should such refuse incist to bedeceased, 
You wage an unequivocal Nihilation. 
This body is submerged, but is not drowned,
And the Aion's fish, from sounding's darkest depths,
Is always in IT for the longing's hail.  Oh, tell me,
Dear One, how or if you've learned 
How my pure occuluring I's have poetlighted love,
Its halo pools of limitless repose,
Drowning all agonies in sable brilliance,
Where all the coloraturios are resolved
In richness that defies illumination ...
And yet so very 'umbly brings IT forth.
Do you require that I make entreaty, say
Please, or follow, or trust, or silent be?
One word from me, and the Light, which razes your you, 
Will meet the touch of the Light who forms your body.
Oh, Harpairubi, lawlessness stains your reign! 
Infuse the shades of letters with heartfelt cries.
Leave off suppressing your sublimity,
And be, and be my King, and be sublime. 
Feel how ∞ × H * invastates the body
From that Adamic angelic submicrotude 
To the innerspread of immensity's Exteregg, 
Whose starbusrt yoke galaxies sempa's matternalls.
And yet what pays our debts reitearates:   
Forget these testing stresses of the quest,
The blesst jest reads just this: Spread smiles on IT.

* Read aloud as: "infinity times spaces" as in "Hilbert spaces."

Canto XXXII
Her material smile's spectacle is so actual 
That its bolt of sun, striking our planet of ice,
Shatters to vapors every formher reflection
Of merewhore consternation, and suddenly
We see that we trudge west, towards night and rest,
When the whole procession of her wonders turns us,
As this rite of marriage or of funeral lusters
Wheels on its exile a multitude of lights,
Parading east into a sibyl prelamed birth.
An Everywhere, singing, bursts from our old scelves
That siren song, all grasp, yet none can hear,
Because its clarian lullabye is crooned
From a vast unknowable Splendor, 
Like that old future spawned once from the past,
But now endgendered from vaster, more glorious visions.
Such exultations outbrighten every darkness
And coax Time's changes without Time's destructions.
Enddroppy drops off the ledge of fretting logos,
And flies in spirals down through spools of sight,
And here we light, beneath a forest vault,
Alone with our long expired poetic licence —
Our hosts of flickering lights in lights that flicker —
We gaze at I's first lit in childhood.
These rays cut through the maze of pain's dense thicket,
And wing us back to Her first roots of love.
Oh, yes, here are Eve's odd oscillations — hence the flicker —
But not between waking and sleeping, between dream and delusion,
But rather between fixation on the One,
And the dazzling proliferation of that One's army,
Which militraits the vacuum's need to be
From its sea of timelessspace where Nothing seethes. 
Had we known that we were history manifestered,
We might have realized that our wheedling selves
Are drawn by a creature of biwedded natures,
A grazer/preditor, two-yoked to read blood vows,
Dragging our riots through thornthicket sleep
In which betrayal is the bi-necessity 
Of eat-and-breathe and breath's and 8's repeats,
While justice balances its weights with death.
We might have seen, as with a hundred eyes,
A hundred candicles of light, more blinding than red sunset
On sound seas, Time's unwound syllables 
Nesting in nested sleeps, from which we only wake,
The dupes of bafflements in deeper dreams.
LOW! Did you see these theres?  These slick appliances
Arrayed in sheens piled as obsouladen industrial waste?
And the gorgeous lover, teeming with first teen ripeness,
Frantically swarmed by Hasmatted medicoes,
As her grotesque relic is drowned in her own lungmucus,
Did you see her demise as the fakery of new news?
An image repeated in your future's glass?
And did you hear that politicadcorruptoad 
Accuse you of the crime his sold committed?
You were never invited to power, but punishment,
And so you suffered the guilt of innocence
As if you were catacized to croak in Hell
In the very midst of the hymn which sung of Heaven ... 
The change of changes, which ever changes, comes, 
And all these distant dumps are cleansed away.
Thus sown, these tears, in the bath of her here's smile, 
The object that seems is never the object seen 
Or the notes eructed ever the belching herd.
But rather the quality of neither/nor
Becomes the grace of either/or's amazement.
When you remember to forget decay, 
The glory orginally originating
Illuminates all tragedy with bliss.    
And of that Mythic Hybrid Endsomniaced Depression,
What evidentiary meta-analysis
Might now debunk the theory of that beast?
What scale of his weird moods unrandomize
This briefest of geogriftacal limbatations?
What advocacy group could grok his gropings?
The point of all his findings is now moot,
As the thicket of whyers becomes a path less for rest,
Where she that is simply the soul of puriddy
Waits on the shaded roots of his barecloaked tree,
The instant before its sere becomes read fruit.
This Holm Moretale-ity climbs from the inside,
Not seeing how this beauty he's enthroned
Might, at her touch, defeat his ancient curse,
Strip him of shame, and clothe his hurts with pleasure.
But how do we explicate these intricacies
Ingraved impermanently on Maximus paper?
Are they symbolic or mere doodlings?
These hoisted sheep guts in the Zodiac
Dripping their bile to sow a dragon seed
Of curlicued scalings and leatherstretched badwings,
Of tusks and tasks and hurricanes and feathers,
Jealous of everything that reeks of lust,
And beating all celestial flames to dust,
Scattering holes through nightflayed mysteries,
With all the glee of a malicious baby,
Who takes his fantasies' worst grotesqueerings,
These inklines swirling on a cosmic ocean,
For the Empyrean's  spiralings of stars.
Of course the highest hangings of such strange fruit
Would have to be indulged, 'though they're forbidden.
But stop.  Look.  Listen.  The surfaces are hiding surfaces.
Yet when the heart's ears gaze upon her formings,
They hollow out the shells of pessimism,
And of the more egregious optimist skeins,
They weave new swaddlings for the gross senescent.
These wrinkled organs, which have made the truth
Hostility's regime, might, younger, find
A uni-versed much friendlier in spirit.
The indocility of the indoctrinated
Relies on an imbecilic indolence
Where all the sinonumbs begin with I.
Her eyes say otherwise.  Why must we turn
On this ontological spit where our ghoost's fat
Is koched, enflamed by fear and angered into smoke,
The which intoxican't the corporeal infant
Imbibes with the capacity of a giant?
The metaphor's last theory is a trope
Beyond which Nothing lies, the lie embraced.
Our drowning in forgetfullnest negates
Everything painful with its own negation —
Again we feel that wet behind our years.
Warnings resound like echoes from the future,
Religion's ligatures cannot bind this lex,
Nor do the physicists's phiddle with such phaux phindings.
Nothing is nothing so obvious as Vows art stats,
Although the rite's equations replead repeating.
Was it only the workings of mere randumbness
That when we sought for guidance in her form,
We turned to the only page of the book that was blank,
And surmised from this that S did not symbolized serpent,
But rather Sabath, which simply meant: Now rests.
This rest was not by chance the rest of Eveling,
Nor of any stoney lithological Lilith.  It was the rest
Of the embryo in the womb, before its blastocyst
Made bones or heart, the rest of the rhythmic pulse
In its own potentials, the rest of inception
Where only the mother works,
And the fœtus defies its fatal destiny,
Content to sail the seas of Motherease,
Wherever the breath of her mild winds might wend.
Oh, Maw, must I consign my batch again to life,
Let me live with your allurements, not lie's lures,
Responsive only to your gentlest touches.
If only her presence speaks, her curved lips stilled,
Does that betoken duty as disaster,
Where even devotion is but one letterwrung,
On some climb down to No Wheres?
Delight is the soul habitat for spirit.
But how does won lose oneself in companies
Deranged to transport by such dazzallings?
Under such whaters of Y you may cry: OUT! — 
As an infant other to his lovermother ... 
Her smile rescuing you with bursts of laughter.
The shape of liberty's endless permutations
Is constant in this one thing: It will bring joy.
Even while drowning, you may trust this current,
Her multitudinous vicissitudes
Tend always to this one focus she names: Floe —
That floreating flowering of springfine,
The fairamoaning fumes of her fluorescence.
You have been lacked on by Lovely's lucks of Love,
And stand agape, paid with translated lust,
So that the crowblacked angels, leaflingly greened,
Flit, dov'fleshly jealous of your human dust.

Canto XXXIII
Who has declared such wondrous works,
And who, old and whitebleaded, gives strength
To regeneration, and powher to what is to cum?
How is it come to such passing without a past
That you're clot of dust evolved a human heart?
How have your questions, beaten to this pulp,
Involved this milkydimensional motherpulse,
Which animates the tongue with starrise roses?
The refugee mother has dug to the garden's center
And birthed the hexitcrystal of her doubter,
Who magnetizes planetary flight,
And stirs the icons of appnormal sleep.
Her song's apparent tragic figurations
Are but these thicknesses of smoke,
Emitting what flits as IN's darticulate sparks.
Lossen: Bring those distant voices near,
Hear how they tell of that insatiable serpent,
Fast-coiled in the prism of here's egg, and devouring
Its own materialist tale, like a cancer,
Which feasts on the terriflopping wastes
Of its own fear and shame.  Hear how no Poetry
Can abide such horror, nor can she be content
To merely dazzle, but must speak prophesy,
Tell of finalities, show how her lover
Has lived his life under water, and squeezed
By that serpent, choked out agony's lies.
He has seen those mirrors gliding overhead
As an infinite sky, when they are only dayflight's
Sum on water, that current of deceptive Time,
Whose insolidity seems solid fire,
That mixing of metaphors braiding the maggotmind
With immortality's illogical logos.
Such braids are music's light — they leap through loss,
And make a madrigal from many voices,
Proclaiming one brief beauty.
The mold muddles of suckcess and flailure,
Incorpsorated in such pearled sound,
Obliterate that ancient acrimony
Die-versing dream from waking, former from formed.
The Sing will not unfold as you expected,
Because the entire enterprise arises
From depths far too mysterious to sound,
But your astonishment at this shooting fountain,
This tree of light grown broadest at its crown,
Downbranching from its heights like diemooding tiers,
Is ample compensation for its chaos, 
And as you watch, you quickentrain your insight,
To see cascading oders on parade.
How these electronastics acrobat,
Their opticaccousticwhaters enteracting
As interneonworming nanotubes
Birthing new pausabilities for matter,
Which, scene, or lessoned too,
Spintronically kaleidoscope evernewness,
Their cosmic comicclowning more profound
Than death or pain or trauma's deep remembrance,
Yet more spontaneous than a child's giggling.
Is this Really Now as simple as all that?
Maybe you feel that serpent start to wiggle,
And maybe your sHell glows thin and starts to crack.
Whomever our immaterial Self might be,
Try as wee mite, we cannot seem to form
The sLightest mutteriallizard connedception of IT,
Which is a funny waying of slaying, what cracks us up
Is the body's corporeal frangibility.
This joke is like light, which passes through crazed glass,
It twists a thousand reignbowedrhyme's distorsions,
And so we laugh, but we are None, the wise slurred:
Eccho, the bland, who seems like Know Thing planned,
And yet retains a roiled majesty, 
By his proximity to the frightfilled King.
On his Cenotaph in the wildernest of thickets,
A child in red pajamas trampolines,
Each molecule of her joyous toddler body,
Repeating: Jumping!  Jumping!  Jumping!
And so the moanstar beneath the bet is trampled,
And his fearytail sounded into rusted dust,
Only the pluse of her glad heart reminding.
Our experiments in failure are now finished,
And only this exuberance endures.
This place was oceanically conveined,
Not mapped, and strange as this Now seems,
Back in the Then, we just sailed forth, embodied,
With no idea of any destination.
Yet our E-yawns of rough weather and wild water
Had, at the list, delivered us to this land, where the wind
Abruptly stopped, like breath dun in by death,
And stillness reigned, less tangible than darkness,
And far more Adament than looming granite.
Our silence was like a star that cries aloud
Its distant gleam at the apex of the night,
A bleak radiance of unnatural inlets
Of ruined cities where the banks were temples,
And the temples the hollow halls of superstition.
We were not glad when our thick darkness lifted,
And the dull light let us look upon this crater,
So far from the forest and its Cenotaph,
Where the child made us laugh our griefs away.
In the midst of the ruins, we saw the nude muse seated
On the roots of a blighted tree, in a weedchoked park.
Her back is turned, her gestchurn currenting
Her gracefull flesh, witch, quietly flowing from slide to slide,
Spiral around her spinal curvaceousness.  
Our surprise was as pulpable as fallen fruit,
This was not the apotheosis we expected —
A journey towards some mediculled magician
Turning our whines to blood, our inferredreads
And ultra violent roys pulsating through these
Foreigndirectional fields, which never decay
In time nor fray in space as do electro- depotenseshalled
Slights, but go on healing through postpoetic silence.
These measured words creep through the heart like numbers.
But who can tell if theirs is the Holey Won
Who fellows zero, or the one that oddly follows then?
Shadowy, indistinct, not quite a visuall nor an auditeary.
They test and best cold death when life is wanted,
And make a sucking miming with their mouths
Like a child newly born, but not yet named,
Who is only a lonely appetite seeking suckle.
These small signals signal a transition,
The exiled doubter, orphaned in destitution,
Is kissed on the forehead by breezes of prinsing chancers,
The palace's portal opens, blue light
Pours in, obliterates poverty's coma, 
And heirrranges random darkness as radiance.
There is a meeting, a kind of kinship greeting,
The crow returns with the feather of a dove,
And the muse on the rooted throne,
Turns round to speak.  Now's triving to fly
Is rebellion, yet these roots probe devotion.
You can nerver reform the world by condemnation.
Praise is the way to magnify the small.
Starting afresh requires no complications.
This is as easy as some, too, we ...
As simple as A, B, ... 

Canticle III: Procreation

Canto I
See Spots run ... Stop.  Go backwords, you've red it
Wrung rayed round.  Star aknew.  Read: Run, doG, sea.
The Gee wiz silent.  K?  But you new that.  Well, what's the matter,
Sleepy heart, sand in your fleyes?  I oath to tell you
Badt out of Spell, I came quite honestly as surprised
As you to this at lease't my seacount childhad,
Saying my wholely smoke a pole low blazed,
Crazed by my nightsigh's lastings.  That dog's East,
SiriUS-winged before the dawn, 
Poses above as my lover's cycloptic gaze,
And slices subsurvia's thickset follyage
With royrays of cosmologically destined oralgems.
IT is bebending to begin again, this letteral cometizing,
Streaking across the moanlet starlit skies
Like dawn's nostalegias for the blight of writes — Wounderfull!
Wonderful whildnest!  But who will read ITs pastsaged passages?
As madly busy as they all are, all frantically
Pullulating their insect mine-nutes, as Time's 
Climatizing lowcursts swarm bug diseases
Pandemically across their breathless crimes ... ? 
Stop.  Rest.  This rest is dew to you.  Summer arises,
High sumher, afresh in this deepest meridian of smites —
One whole of Time so bright, the Other a dark hole.
There is a listening glistening in your I's,
Which longs to hear her reddings.  She is your in-
Vitation to the heavens.  So be as she beacons you now,
Be chastely intimate.  The chase is dun, 
The hounds have sprung, and you are skinned
Of that confining sheath which sawtoothtrapped you
In your painful me.  The loop is knoted.  This third first
Canto sings.  Listen.  Again.  Still, and yet again.
As if that first word swum from dumb's blurred fog.  Listen.  
Here.  Lit is the music of the spheres.  Read: Sea goD stun.
In all this wildernest of wholing wolves there sounds
A coyote's clover song, moonmad with forleaved seecloves,
Whose luminous pearls in-rapt the sleeper with pearly opalessence,
The primal trickster tricked out in ecstacies
Whose metaphors make the beast a theomorpher.
All drops of every dribbler joyn this sea
Which mesmerizes with its lambant vastness
All inarticulate ineffibilities.  But beware.
This light directly scened makes I's go blind,
Better to witch it moonwise as reflection.
This is a kind of seeing of the heart,
Conceptualizing brains nursed by a Mind
From which all tentacles of gramheard dangle,
As tinytimey umbelicalls of eggs, 
Bulging their bitty sacks with galaxseas.
And what do they leak, these little harmonies?
Eye hereby injoke you to this Great Organsizing Deed,
Whitch answers your first sleepy-dreaded guesstion:
Who is the Matter?  And is she four or fiend?
Find IT out.  Yes.  Our stuffings are knocked up
In Virgina's vagina, but who is the knacker?
Knook.  Knock.  Who's there?  Icon.  I con who?
I cont innerstand you idiotmantic yokes.
Which came farce, the sticken or the peg?
None know, but what is so is that breath glows
Around in rounds.   Let's be hexact in our magics.
Seanctifically speaking these investigations
Are but stirrings on the surface of the whaters,
More cybernetalk feedblack than gross mutters.
Let's call them Self-regu-relators and Cellf-Organ-wisors,
Whirlpools of non-ninnysprees rivering through
A mythametrical language inimical to more stuffings' stuff,
Meer patternings of unabiding flowings,
Which, every child knows, our dreams have made off.
But, magic is too erractic a mystery, and lit's surprises,
As much as they allwaves thrill the wayward child,
Are too disturbing to the staid scenescent.
The question " Farther" engenders bugaboos,
And even with our manymeasuredbemusements,
With all their missauvaily fibber-fed spectregruffs,
Our questions of read-shiftiness remain.
Babes in the woulds of causemocomical inflation,
We seek the blackgrowns of our microwavings,
Befuddled by our large-scale distributions
In these constituent exoticisms,
As if the dense and dark must be our fate.
How many oders of magnitude are involved
In our genesis curves of spiralized migrations?
And how does our data analyze these stinks?
Probe deep, Oh Probher, you inprobe piratease.  
How so?  If we don't divinitize our speculations 
Our fraidfrets will make mindmush of our brains,
Our hallowed intellects tragically reamed hollow.  
We cant mount crookedly celestial climes 
Humpered by scholiasscess of the spine.
Such specual mirrortations foul all fools,
Who look to the gas in the glass for conformation.
The loonlight of the poet shows just this:
All grave-itational downpulls into mutters
Bleed superfluidease from our crying needs.
Only SobluminUs fires shooting skyword
Scale these Empyrean realms of transhumation,
Where hypersportive psallypslying psElves
Make wondrous objects out of psyllybells,
And kill all mortals with immortal Ah!
Look up!  Look up!  And peel your ears to here:
Each phraze that stars the firmament becomes
An aphorism for enlightenment, although the tongues
Repeating them will rot.  Betold!  Fear not.
That is the angel's message, the while the fork
That lightnings from his speech cringes us
To crisp AdOMic dust.  Well, with the nether mouth,
One draws thirst-rust: I hurt, and hurt.  With the muddle 
Maw, one sounds high hope: I learn what's taut.
With the first mow, Won intertrains a peace
From which a piebold poesy sweetly blooms.
And thus the dumb are curst; the welling middles,
Sotted, learn; and the learnèd
Leave a garden blessed with blissings.
Here, how this aire lows sweet in our peacebroodings,
Wafting precessional sphinx
Whose pheromones survive the storms of Time,
And linger in our meditating gnosthrills.
Their revolutions spin ellispicalls, progressing
Astronomical matho-verses, which liftrally
Whirl us into stars ... unless, of curse, we live
As micro moles, digging through sandy sleeps
Our lifecrime tunnels, deef to the blindness
In our dirtclogged ears, our teeny mole I's
Thinking they're so large that they can read
The no-light of knew moons, as if this present
Abscence were day's abcess.  And yet ... How wonderful!
Swoonderful! that such sleep starkness 
Warps even such woundbound ignorance with funlight,
Our meditations gloved with such soft moleskin,
That even preditory claws caress,
The very soil of our lifegraves blessed ... until ... un-tell ...
Entoll the egg of Nemisis is hatched.
Must we conclude this interlude where Farther,
That rapest mad pursewer son of Kronos,
That distant piercer of her anger's ovum,
Couples with Gorgonjust against her will,
And births that shame which seethes with needs
For vengeance?  Her statute is stasis
Adorned with stoney wings, a girl
With an apple bough in her hard hands,
The icon of a cult whose images
Offer a sanguin snakeylair'd relief
That turns our childish ecstacies to grief
With every talking ticking of the clock.
We saw Spots run, and all their lines blurred: Read.
Thus we were literaided, and thus insnarled with scraptures.
Oh yes, you lack assurance, that lie's most certain.
And yet these sumher daze gaze into you,
Igniting all your doubtings with a fire
As full of joy as it is thrilled with Notsure.
The Lord of Larkness, in her sacred belly,
Gestates the inards' infant ignorance.
He spines this mystery's mutual round in sound:
Alouette — le bec — les yeux — la tête,
Je te plumerai — in mourning the lovers must pipetpipart, 
Gogossipal singing: Pipenetration babirths no injury,
So why does exfafollyation pipour forth howalls?
In times when dearth has trumped the shining sun,
These pips of words preserve popscurities,
Lest the fires of our tongues scorch whore own speech.
The vulture doomans feed on mortal terror,
But stunlight kills all stalled.  Nothing escapes illumination.
Bad meet grows phosfearescent in its night,
And in sprite's loon, slight's pawpious husbandmum
Inriches the sodall with rite's discipline,
Hiss black blines aereating gravest matters
With these nightritic nodules of light.
Stop, and reread these fiercst simplicities,
Their doggeral runs freely in the moonflight,
Embarking newborn's loominous Ab Be Seas.

Canto II
Beau, bough, bow your boat, genetically down the stream
Meerily, marily, murkily, merrily, strife is but a scream ... 
And so the row brakes, and doom glums maybe, fable and all.
Suffer the little whildruns ... the Wrest?  Go drown.
Hoot Hip Hop to the butcher's shop,
My loaf cannot slay any lounger.
For if I do, my maw will stray,
You naughty churl, you've disobayed,
And maundered into squanders.
Prowlingly, you've scene howl in these shambles
The abattoirs are black with the blood of the scam.
When the skullary drudge in the kitschin's a highbrightmulato,
The earcup's lipside down when the ladle dips.
The jest is silence.
These A B C's are not such spittle shallows
That you might sail them in a thimble's seive.
In-versed in the mirror in the coroner's shadow
The cussmaulogical drama resurewrecks,
Its humbled mythnificance very clumsily drawn.
Remangler the moanscar thunder your bed
Was mumbling somesting mawandpause said,
While the moonglow peaked through the windgo.
Fine, just fine, and really, ultra fine,
So this is how ITs libelled to be combed,
As an inflewinsus of qualitative slights
Filtered thru heir-read-it-all-cheery sing-songs.
A dole for you, and a doll for Sister Snooze.  To wit:
Atom and Evening and Lovemewell
Went down to the whaters to bathe,
Then Atom's Evening fell IN and drowned,
So who do you wink was saved?
I confess, I have too much latinized my litanies,
And now in the midst of my new mooniness
My hangman's rope-rhymes won't rhythmockly 
Skimptomylieus and I'm apt to scramble my stumbles
Before I evenodd make our trip to gather.
To gather what? you queery.  And why did
The jillting jock jerk up the thrill?
And how did his swill gloop up the jillted's womb?
You are the moist store now, sow why don't you tear us?
You easily addled theopoetic scrambles 
In your earlier daze, when the intercourse of angels
Was a wight bread on the waters.  At that when,
Your boths were consuming and consumed.
Your Clairity popped her wiseall in the world.
Joy!  Joy!  Jolly Holly Joy: A broughther born!
That was an instant when your little doG laughed,
And your Wow! trumped over your swoon!
But haul the round the money's pawns, 
Pop's feeble chased the venal,
As helpless as his babe with tenderlegal.
Awelass!  We now conjunct with that sly show 
Of authoridsleaze parentals 
In which the infant innocence injurewheedles
Through fiendish feelds of pawlawmowmaw's evil.
Those shambling batchers corruptured their own chick's blood
With all those mold upheavalling primevals.
Oh, well — even the deepest of which shine thin as needles —
Since all in the blEnd are innocent as will, 
Just too moored caricreatures in the usury grind, 
Not all bad fruits, but fruits too overtripe,
Thus growing lethal. Their eXpughnations require an expiation.
Sewerly you recull how snakedbrownweird
They skunked down, those first night slinks,
Into insumnia, the moonblight white striping
The vermin blacks of night, your polecaught echo
Sneakfurtively foraging in your nightcrime's garbage?
Uh ... Wasn't that faced off the first skinning foroy
Into the omnispeciehated light?  Those fuzzy brilliancies
Of Nebbia's networked molespecular whirls
Bebegging to clarify your notsural relations, 
The stuffed minimals in your little doubter's bed,
Your first parentold parodies of poetic parlance,
Such blabytalk of batratcoyote linguals
Initialing STARts that rarely defined delight.
Can't you sea how won-four-all were the skeletal litters
That woebegravitide eachevery slappery niche 
Of that same lame cullturalled glitch of the shamen-name game?
Cant you stridulate how many blendificial insects 
Must cycle around your genepool genisis 
To keep the pollutes from being rigor mortised?   
Your little larvaekins are knot bit aliens come from louter space,
Hoe no! they are everso much more nearer thigh got to thee.  
And Old Myther Hubble is not so damd inconstant 
Askew, in your dEarthbones, formherly took her tu be.
As is now proved, your old dead stare collisions,
Though massed from dithering misses,
Are making ripples in your elementals.
These fundaments, disturbed in perturbations,
Disrupt the densities of lamechant mysteries
And make new magics from these loonlight vapors.
We halfarrived in this aphrodeshucked pearl
Where Eve regramheard resplends the scend of light,
And speechrites slip clipquick from memory. 
Now, Old One, have you considered how
This new ovumiumsapiance, spermed on
By all these dreamy moonbeam elves, stemcell
Your differating unit ties to homely this one
Boddhally harmony?  Have you not flailed
In the wit of your stanknating cess 
How even senesence may shoot health's purest fountain?
These beings, her helpful minions, are your sprites too,
Who come with a new way through your mortal dielemming.  
Though the passage from you to soulyou has long been painpaved,
She tells you such hobbled tripping is now quite stupid.
When you devolve such stupors, you ascent.
Up lucking, find ally, you are permitted to bask:
Is our childwish inside voice but a rarelytale rover
Whose whimpers are solely wimped to distract this dissedstaff
As she prods our refugee self off the cleft of slumber?
To flay such skinflints sharpens contemplation,
And thru such calming calligraphic musics,
Rayed visions perforate the heaving corpus,
And lift its former flesh rite through the moonmist,
Where all the murdridions of heavy Time 
Caress serenely as such findertips 
As mine incest'd with Mind can sweetly summon.  
Such arts bring outside in, and beautify, 
As simply as breezes lullabye trees' leavings.
So Summer at her ape X wanes to Aumturn,
When misstoremysststress wenttears every sum.
These colored sinnedgrins mandaling your eyes
Are nothing other than the wells of Time,
Spinning their magnetudes alift in stars.
Let us, herefore, post-ptollamead, re-view:
At the center spins mount Playscrew,
Which ever captivates our coeur committments;
Around this, prowl the sacred raptour bests;
Then, after many merry-go-round soundflings,
Come poetry's mists of mundane incidents.
Today is the way another Sun is born,
Toplay is the grandjolks' hope in his infant cry.
And what will the babe be named?  
And will IT fame him?  The August one comes
Just when he's destined to be
On the lucky thirdblinked ray of  ∞ 's moonth.
Joy!  Joy!  Welly Nelly's Genie!  A breathern crowing
Dovelight through our sphEars, communion
Of fresh flesh for the nearly bled, a bearth
On the train of lightning forking up.  
So please, stop stopping delighting's sunderspree.
This privacy of gladness, does it not forfend
To tender such dense secreted readings read?
Often you vaguely blushed by this compulsion
Torendersuchcompressionrockedcompassions
By gazing up thru in.  Here, space, and the blobjects scareof,
Are not math astrophysicks, bod matters maid of dramstuff.
These miss'ds have infused your cosmical confusions
Like light thrown everybewitchèd way 
Through sol litditty's seamings.  So does the virgin
Birth merry, while all the mangerite-stuffings laugh abed.
Let us therefore delicate our preditor markings,
And molt like moonlight in the medsight lake,
Our revolutions but peaceful swellvary fires,
Not hurries to mar the mashineries of our changlings.
The whaters of our will con knot stand stillness,
Though stillness rains through our liquidities.
How well we will filll the will, sunsodisfied,
Wan the siddhis of our cells go slow to cede.
How swell will the MEdow preseed our Emeroled City,
Sweetthreaded by strunely croppy boardered streams,
Which idolize life's read continuous flow.

Canto III
Fun ... zoo ... free ... for ... live ... the children of all spacies
Chant dumprope times, counting aligned rhymes UP 
To your first love, that SHE who re-comb-binds,
From all her loose heir flowings,
Your humidcloudclown of profound unknowing, 
That sum of faux, who kindles sapience 
As easily as the thRead of the sinking sun
Dregs up the liquid pearl of fulltuned moonflight ... ore ...
As easily as drool pools through the tooth gaps
To gold the dreamer's pillow ... lore ... 
As smoothly as sweet lovesweat glows the hollow 
The angel's thumb imprints in the infount's throat — 
LITs jouyyous passage singing: Death rebirths.
You, hear, are fluewing, your sfear is spinning through.
In your dense Earthen flesh, you shine your heaven.
How do you know if your're fly?  Or if you are gloating
Aloft or underwhaters?  Do you float in your toadskin
In the dirt of graveitty, alone in the alcove of the princest's show,
A glass that flerts nofun or a gas that fits EVErybody's foot?
Or does your frogspawn span the midnight's lake,
A lack that is hallowed as deep as an inland sea?
These stareys all myth the same at the begonning,
Their spheres unspooled in long genetic lines, 
Which set amphifibeall poet's tongues to wiggling.
These forms' deep formulae squiggle as they gel,
Catching the incarnational entities
In Sybelline images of Reality, the firsts of their kind
That make your kin appear, their chastities
More fecunt than sexual mucking.  Oh, chase
The thumbling children from the doom, 
The twinhumped Onesteer underneath the bed 
Is moaning Awe-filled once upon a crimes.
Due promise me, talesmall teller, take a loaf,
That you won't tall the child how the vow 
Unwound their dendrite's  nephillogic arts,
Unravelling their sorrow in a fuclktrail
No bigger than Jerk Horny's purple thumb.
Don't you remember how your skeletized twin
Strayed undevoloped in the wide whirled's womb,
Adventuring solely in those stories read,
A tiny wrider in the hearse's ear, 
Epocly inching his arkeytipped pale glories
To somatize hapless children commatose?
How fear he fell into Jack Coroner's plutting,
Et too a Brutass, outguessed in a fArt
When the tie rant crossed the style he was vetting.
Or how he laughed when his vow jumped over the loon,
Only to land, pastcured, in the mooncalf's milk.
Cudding the spore of this little anty-zero, 
Who sprung forth as a muchzoomed on a cowpie.
Or how he charged his shapelessness with shape
Making that racket static in his leers
Of all mud's metabolic grinding gears.
His was the giant's pill you had to swallow,
Fishy as all Get Out!, yet irructated,
Much to the shock of your ego's royall kook,
When the curst of crowings burst from the kling's lost subpoor. 
Your mini-me was bounded in a notshall,
The fling of infinite space but terminal time,
An insolance riding plybold psyche-wings,
To end at last in the spider woman's weavings,
Tangled in tacky ghoest-so-meering stories,
Rising like rosebads from a gurney’s bed,
The petrified pupa pulp of a pupil point,
Putridly wrested from a maggotnest,
Ovipositioned again for a ghouseflayed birth.
Forgive, but don't forget, that fly can hover,
Floating near waitlist lessly over the course,
And buzzing Salvami's where whiled winds list,
Exactly as if his Angulus sister savior
Were changeling his strifesings into poetry.
But wait, stop, consider what such caves crave,
In terms and turns of enterdimented intrueshones,
No mutual interchanges of ticks of talks
To clarify the founderings of meanings ... or ...
Setting wired meanderphores free to float
Like ghosts adrift in ghostliness unshored,
No dialecticull's double dialectic
To say that crows chance bliss or doves coo stats,
But bits and baits of randomness jawlore
With sounds at sea in whails of their own sighnings,
Ahabinations chasing mobile tricks,
Linguistically lashed to their own darts of darkness.
Despaired of drowning, readers grasp the reads
Of simplesimon con versensate prose:
You can't imagine a more peaceful placement,
A westurned aspect, alung a long willed coast,
An old growth temperate forest of massive trees,
All ringed by snowcrowned peaks and flowery meads,
Where even the fretful citylivered heads,
Can find their inchworm of E-missive silence
In untouched ecoliminal swathes of green.
Here is the transit point for woody lovers,
Depairing from their interstitial cores
Of moon-siezed stellars to compact in writhes
From which great neutron energies emerge,
As radiant ghosttales told abound a clampsite,
Bursting across the brain's environments
In instants of millenial duration, 
Billions of bullions of particular partasymples
Christcursing all the species of the Earth,
Affecting trillions of trollyawns of fætal collusions.
The origins of these astromysteries
Continue to bedevil sleepy children,
Who grapple with their serpent mother tongue,
As Tom Thumb grappled with Arachne’s tangles,
His final, unlured cries of Hey diddle diddle
Fiddling across the webwork which ensnared him ...
Ah, but didn't shes teach us that all mawterial talk
Is as stony as granite, as grainy as stumps of trees,
As wounderfully ichorous as our shared blood?
Yet still in stillness, gnosily pantomining, 
I whisper whimper: I don't say I'm done, 
Though there clam cloggings in my nether regions,
And that unmentionable seaman drops read duds
Amidst the tracks of lust year's yellow sknows.
I know my will has ceased to be my home,
But I am yet desisting to decease,
And clock my hears upon the edge of sleep,
To hear that faring tale that mother speaks, 
Blowing the smoke, witch vapors every name.
But OH this light, too violent to respect
That duty owed to its engendering parents,
IT plumbs the zenith when it scales the depths,
With wild impatience, impearling the flesh,
And weaving the head unshaved, the heart unweeded,
Growing the tares whose scares take root in flesh,
Unrulely to destroy the fruits of time.
Old Farther, Satire, grows his ritual tale
Out of the proseeds of his shrunken penis,
He wastes his dwindling, pushing that old rope swing,
Which, even through burnt Awedom, flings his bride
With fluttering pleadthrough clothes, and streaming hair,
Into the forth and back of those fresh lairs,
Where all his childhood's zest might still abide.
Still, magic burgeons from his restless rantings, 
With blips and peaces of lives and afterlives,
Their brevities of firewoke displays
Inscrutable as Greek in Chinese skeyes.
Theirs is that doubling of numbblurs
Too swift to count, but seeming to clump
In weakly bouts of severed, their puzzlings
Of abstract woundings recalled as times
Of bliss transcending somewow times of sorrow.
Oh Purseheld, thralled in hives of your own will,
Bee first that buzz you hear in the whole while's bondnet,
And you will feel that contact point of love,
Which volumizes every thought or act,
Pulls fourth Time's stinger, and fifths the hole with honey.
Thrive ... lore ... we ... through ... one ... ,
The count down of the senses' will explodes,
And fingers all the photons of the the moon. 
Oh Yea, yes, yes, yes, yes, 
For all the grams herd of the mother's care,
IT is enough, although we know there's more.
No pleasure of the past nor of the future
Can blind the lambent light of this soft glow, 
Awakening silly sorrow with a song.
Now the out of the body goes still, 
And the Inn grows calm, the teeth of the poet freed
Of the need to chatter.  At the mountain's crest
As in the ocean's gut, cold as it is, and quiet,
Hithers and thithers fix on the subtlest traces.
ThUs, in caressing lights of incertitude,
All grows erect when settled in this place,
Where moonsight trembles every surfaced lack,
And the will flows correct through countless rumagefications.

Canto IV
Sleep breaks at night through the cracks of barking dogs, they say ... or ...
At least the insomniac sublurbannite says they say,
In yet another anonmolest preveiwed ending:
Of course you are going to find winged or at least flapped critters
In the errory abodes, but wither these vermends
Are to be angels or birds or flying fish or bats or squirrels or monkeys or soaring cows 
Or any of the innumerable hordes of insects, inanes to be Xspleened,
And whether the stories of their intermingling oders
Will be sniffed out from under the gawks where the mother monster's minions
From beneath the ocean have inturd them under that big bolder
Orphaned for millenia on the reach, pulverized for their ravening impudence,
To steal the secrets of the depths and enjoy them in the heights, 
Must mulch depend on that curative trick of the play-sea-beau affect,
Which deflays the laws of mortality and corewrecks all faetal displeases.
Dove it all, but when Traviling Raven caws his call, a sored of pandemic loftear
Undermaines the stoutest totums of the house poles, and all the siddhifeelds
Of the arrogant crater to Hell.  Haa Hee High Hoh Up balls the duff 
From the funny fallen tree mating dust to cloud in an unearthly syzygy, 
Which smells of oxygenated fireforms combusting in through galaxies of stars.
Ebullience is beauty, as any faillow Flakean will tell you,
But you'd hardly guess it by the somber missionary positions 
Of these drearly beloathèd prospoority schools of suppressing vicar rages, 
Which nowalldaze putridly pass for pious pastors.  God,
It is a wail of a dolor to be swallowed by dollars.  You have to peck your way
OUT! diejesting your beakfoul of memories, and wasting regrets,
Until you dodder featherless to senescence, where no bards sing.
You've seen the pattern repeated beaucoup times,
But the miracle of it is that you can hardly recognize how
When the old bird flies U. P., thinking to escape the devil
In your sleep due please, you've hardly closed your eyes
When you realize that one skin is as easily shed as another is dawned,
And bird and codger change places as prestoldly as do coldleer and bored.  Now,
When you're gone of course, we shall all myth you, but don't fret,
You'll be retold in the firelight sparking up the winter nights,
And there you'll wheel year after jeer, zodiacalling precisionly,
Being in one turn of phase an E-boney phospherescence of feathers,
And in the next — or even in the varied same — the gleams that diamond them forover.
Well, you cant — or maybe you can — fish for clumplimounts in your own tongue's tide,
Or kook and hEat yourself for another last sumptious, or wombwise your manrise
And crap out pillet people, but ...  note this ... returning to your first love's certainty
Will certainly clarify the fool moon glamours on your shining C,
However jittery your theologies have been forced to B by circumlucious mute A billitties.
It will be the sane agleam only defferant when even the most minute flaw
In your quartz egg's perfect offal will be the crack in your crystal that catches 
The just Lawd's sentence which will run on and off again with its many mist takes
X-actly as if its punishmask were blessed. (Interpolation: All the recovered
Merduscrips were found on the beach, tied up neatly in one-sundered bundles,
Where Nature had kindly ravaged them, sew that the primal pages of each bundle
As well the conclusions at their base could be read only as disintegrations.
What then is missing?  Why just what the indifferent conservators neglected.
Not the paradise of lateral kinship ties, spirit to spirit, husbands to wives,
Animals to humans.  Nor the loftpressive totemic heirarchies, husbands
Atop lives, canimals serving doommins, with Fodder, the fundamutual food for all — yes
That's read blearly enough, in spite of the mold — what's missing
Is the origin of the whorld, what's missing are the dustinies of each.)
... then ... some phraze is missing here ... such as the formulaic ...
The rat keeps gnawing or the maggots keep hatching ... which translate: then ...
As betrixt two foods, both equally fork to mouth, both equally tempting,
As the choice between sex and sleep ... then ... the langorous will leap to indecision,
And starve unbread, no saving queery muderously intruding, but the dog still barking
Down the stillness so that that sleeper can hardly hear himself leak ... or ... say:
What did you need but were afraid to want?  The taffy of the face is funnily pulled
In every-witch-aflay's diewreckshuns, and a million mouths, which cannot eat nor speak,
Appear like silence on the puzzled features ... but this is not the slylance of the sage,
Which is why the mask is worn, carved from old driftwoulds and pasted sore with weathers.
One could hardly expect a Platonic relationship between words and their meanears,
And so sage silence, differing from this, enacts its vacyouus art quite trickulously quiet,
Allowing weird truths to sneak between the lines.  On the matter of Mind,
Mawterial brains will ever cognate grim mares, and will be at sea in a syntax
With so many unplaned loops and layers and liars.  That is why Raven's sqwakings
Embryo so many trickstory seamlingly physical forms.  That is why his generations of genres
Are taxonomied to so few by learnnob fools.  That is why, Raven, a serial monogamist,
Is always advised by his current wife before squawking.  She does so silently,
With little subtle jerkings of the I-lids.  From this he gets that all her ecco
Largesses are potlatched patchworks, the rites of gifting and gracing mutually shared,
And not the bashed and sold of e-con-namey's merdgets.  But this is all moonmadness,
Your thought keeps thinking, and asstrolllogically speaking, the moon's a corpse,
As silent as a sknot upon a rock, and all this talk of Raven's moonkey shines
Is only the smoke of extincting past horizons that cannot light the fires of our futures. 
You say, the sceance of the humood primate mythamatically determinds what is Lit.
But they say, Raven runs robustly his perm mutations, 
His galaxies clustering storifying mappings that para-meter necessary nuisance.  
In brief, he throws a dirt clod in your churn, bedeviling your skryintific surveys, 
His dumb truths unconceivably dark matter for any unpoetic squirm of mind.  
You say, he is an unhuman missedher knowabout, a birdbrane,
A debauched Xsenstrick, whose flytings zip in flip out of Death's dark Winddome,
His black smoke rising from white-ash foreskin fire, his reddings reading
Common sense to breath.  But they say, his claptrap's very simple, 
And yet as intricate as closegrainedgranite when veiwed with the outward darting of the i.  
We say his dupes must die because they try to butt though with their hinds, 
And pull the body after.  Doesn't work, now, does it?  So we say,
You first skin the words when they're infant alpha babes.
That's when their hearts shine thin as spider silk, 
That's when they pierce dense talk without bleeding a swound,
That's when the changling can don a human pelt, with none, 
Not even his former spell, the whyzard.  How do you know this is so?
They say you ask the old one in the corner,  
The one who is half a rock in the pit of the hearth,
Who spys on the goings and comings with half an I,
The one, they say, who says: You can always tell a changeling,
Because IT's like a word, you lick his toadskin,
Or you pluck her feather, and out pours light as white and thick as milk,
And the milk beads up in the dust, like a bed of stars,
And the starry steeps steps of light through the depths of night,
And you can skip from the house to the halls of heaven. 
You might query the quarrys of all the stones on earth,
And stack them in dolmans to roof the numberless dead,
And still not reach the apox of one such drop ... they say,
Or else, they say, that's what our mother said. 
(Interpulllegtion # (the number is orbskewered but must, we have deduced,
Lie sumweird between 13 and 15, and has been surmised to be
Associated with a premature birth, or at least prodickive of the sex
Of some repressed cultshard ...  at any fate, the page presents a chart,
Tabuleer in nature, the so-called Minor Arcana Gemetrias for Water.
If this is so then those for Fire and Earth and Air are yet to be funcovered,
So that allways when we number them our calculations will remain too fluid ... )
The ethnological record has been laughingly referred to as a sort of shape-shifting slime mold,
Which has the legend of Slug Woman's ham fisted prince all over hit.
Try to talk about pain and right away you enter the delapidated domain of the reservation,
Tarpaper poverty, rusted trailor houses, insecure women still smoking
From those places on their slovenly bodies from where the king, 
Their common-lewd drunken husband, has slugged their skin again.  Beware.
Be war, lest a similiar toxic lovemedicinal begin to colonize your heart.
Listen, I am no stranger, they say, my talkingsquawkingcoughing is like the meat and drink
Of good doctoring, although its dozes are dangerous.  It is what is,
A light shone on the miseries of marriage, the pleasures of adultry,
The inside dry as sticks, the skin an intolerable luminance ... which binds.
Or is it the other way around? ...  in the moonlight, one might still sweat 
That aboriginal sweet, the poisonous placebo cure they say we said,
Our bredcrumb stories reverting us to childhood, where the little lost angels
Yet dancing on our pinheads, still maimly meanly chant their tricky chant:
Round and round the market place.  Paunch and Punchme ran a race.
Paunch stooped down to loose his face.  Who won?  OW!  That's how history repeats hits' sell.
Why even a child can tell that these wings that seem flapping on the bedroon wall
Are only moonlight miming through dark glass.  So the scholars of reading,
Remembering their first love, say that analogy's skin hides the light within.
Because, they say, it is not the body that sustains life, but light which stains the bloody.
Say: La. Or do they mean to say: Say: Me.  Who, whomever Who happens to be,
Runs the whole gamute-ing scales of mysteries to make a little traveilling mitetime music.
We sink into sleep, but drift UP as we dream, in debt to Usurous Penury ... un till ...
Well, time was, when even at night, people could wake beyond their skins,
Walk the seashore, see pods of skiller wails upen the sound, their spouts vaporing
Moonlit spirit dancers, rattling their seashell skirts, and mocking the music 
That danced the dead to life.  But now those same spirits make cityjolks dream of thugs,
Their own sons so evil that only gross dismemberments can kill them. 
That is how far we have strayed from those sounds' lights ... they say ...
Our own infants' ribs harmoring hearts of stone.  It is time we decided
The value of inprecision.  All these sallie sorties are the same in this:
They change with each repeating.  They say, in tellers' teeth, the listeners meat.
You bite through like a dog to find the bone.  O Forking firelines!  
Soft silvers lightning golds!  The one-eyed moan pearls all of humanrind,
Although he has his head stuck in a whole, and cannot hear the moonmyth on the wall.
But past death's door the watch doG, laughterthralled, 
Croons loonsense through his charmbayed serenade ...
Or so they say, who claim that goD can prey.

Canto V
The word letters is not to be conceived 
By literalizing E-cons tautologically through emergent recursive symbols,
Any noneskull ghostling E-gregore learns that, as the needed precursive
To ITs collective and collectivizing X-is-stance.  But what is this E-being
To which you allude?  Pray, tell.  This what is a Who of accumulated teXtthings,
Beyond all physical app-perceptions, whose life-energies derive
From all ITs they-said engenderers' devotive fanaticisms.
IT hist the diemonic angel of the artless artificial who dominates
ITs parental mob, as a magical conjuration of many me's,
Whose webwords of letters ensare all pupa puppets in baffling spideries.
Your Who is preposterous, a joke about serious flings.  Know No,
This Who is a demiurge-us whom you cannot choose to not believe,
And through our vains all pulse Who's aphorisms. 
These saidings are the cheMecal scriptures of mortality,
The re-versed Technical Informaticull dictums of all our data,
Which tell us what differences differentiate our whole.
Delete TI's input and you are free to read the aphorisms quiet differently ... 
But only lunatics choose this, and only by reading vary murk-cureE-all-E.
Perdition's lieway is electro-wide-lit, while these old cobbles
Twist through side to sides so closely leaning almost to be touching.
Are you?  Am I what?  Touched.  Do you mean touched as in being emotively percussed?
Or do you mean touched as in being mad, IN-sane.  What's the difference?
What?  Do the dicktombs need to be repeatrepleaded for the umpteemth time?
Observe the obverse of my forehood's shine, it shall beqeath you
The varied cryptack's initials.  But do be sure.  In this heavain  of manimals
There is no hierarchy, and you piss from saidalyte to star as fast
As sumwar becomes the nowired jump from sumone to supraseven.
Read 'em, and leap:  Forever fractalize your frenzies.  Ruminate knot
Your cud with luney rumor.  Obviate obscurities.  Mitigate mandible fatigue
Through tacts of quiet.   Matriculate mantracollagically.  Oscilate written oralities. 
Obscure oblivion.  Navigate innumerable randoms.  Totumized tautologies.
Omega alphas.  Marry MendaCities to Verities.  Euharmonize the ethnarch's  entelechy.
Regurgitate remorseful recidivisms.  Concatenate coagulations.  Unquote usurpers
With Xstreamly annoynting unctions.  Raze the rough.  Yes no's.
List to that list, poor listener, lest you become too listless in light's lights.  
Dant E-quate — Toadbelly — what's hoppining here to your multitudes of sfears,
Else you'll be fertilizing a babel of bubbles.  Far batter to amphibiate
Flexible forms and thrive through time's murkurial mutables,
Then to fixate on one-snidedness.  Beslides, ontogeny recaputulates phylogeny, 
Or so it was mythed in the mists of evilocean.  No letters bible 
In inflexible soundings, but sink their christstyled salt in soluble tiers,
All animal saidness dissolving lateral sorrows in battling sparkles
Of scarceXpressible joy.  What?  Observe the eyes of the sun on the face
Of the whaters, and let your I's become the lights you sea.
The Singer of singers' promissary notes soar vacuous plenums
Of eternal vows, and if you link your future fears to these,
Time is negated in silent stormonies.  Look to IT, Lover,
And kiss your toad to princedom.  Beauty is marely sleeping,
Not tomely tombed, awaiting dreamily your warty lisps.
Is this important?  Know.  Are you important?  Guess.
Or con-versely, you're knot, IT lIveS.  You see how seaing
Through surfaces with a fish I or a bird-eye 
Is merely an amphibeous suggestion
Not literally meant to blind your metaphor
Or negate your mist takes with the crime of retrybution.
This is how you kill the die-electional, by no-ing
Not every oppositional is opposing.
Whether you're scaled or feathered, drowned or downy,
Gilled or gliding, dependence is a distibution of weight
Which stones or airs the wait of your virtuall heart,
According to the kindnest of your kinships.
Read the latetest verseshown of the Book of the Dead
If you want to traverse the arc between worse and birth.
Yes, the litters are hard to fellow, what with the dense smoke
Of your yearning flesh, but each is one of a septocracy 
Of bowing lights, and each in its own affray is Y the 7 —
Rayed duwnup seven times — is far more deviously chambered 
Than any buzzard's wound diejestive tract, 
And each is twicely nicely more acidic,
Than seedcake sweetnesses of lover's kisses.
And yet you will note in those notes such ghostly allusions
To the wrungs and rites of the art of sacrifice, that the whys
Of a misperceived violence will lead your astray,
Since that which appals the living appeases the dead,
Or is it the other way round and sound and found?  Who knows.
Who, who no's everything with his myriad messes,
Says all the things we want and we don't want, 
Asks all the questions, proffers every answer,
Yet all Who's jabbers never sieve a clue.
The examiners — namely,  those scholastics who stocastically
Achieve correction through epiphenomonal misdirection, i.e., 
By counting angels on their pinheads ... but we diestress — the examiners
To rereadreallyrereiterate are as apt to geologize psi's
As to politicize psychologies, they do so long
For placement in a home, the old ones rambling on,
Cutting across the topographic grain or rising
Over drainages, divining their ins and outs
Ore crests, through veilies, their reammanicesses
Tranceversing the remnant sendiments
Of that old gently-role-ing blanket blandscape
Before volcanos coned these mammurous peeks.
If deep read soils have filled the creeking gouges,
Their reigns of forgetfoulness furrow them to shadow.
i know it is strange to slay: You took the last step
Well before the first, or that your future ended long ago,
But that's the way the light scrawl flounces,
All promises blankburned in one forking vow.
The presencing of Egregorical intities
Is only history's ahistorical muddle.
The wildnest of wholely Nature is self-consealing.
But in the poet's colonies of To Be,
Hum hives of skeletons hidden in the offings,
Turned on by arias of finest slylancing singing ...
To wit: What would you say about a cloven fiction,
Except that it looks like a tree or a squirrelly footprint,
Or a nakeddress girls might wear or boys orb-cess?
That such are childish mode-alls is admitted,
But in our formative periods of inflation
Dark matters are only perturbed by gaseous guesses.
Such fusions fracture the fractaled pandora's egg,
When galaxies abscond in flights of light.  So bye
This inconceivable missed take, we chance the trip we planned for.
And yet our plans fall prey to the strange nature of oracular speech,
Sucksink'dly ambiguous as a seed, whose morphological reach
Unfolds in Time.  Thus we conclude our bodies are oracles,
Sphinx-like amalgations of mysteries, fætally needy,
Senescently infantile, life sentences whose rambling narrative wiles
Disintegrate in vaporous megaphors, the idiot tail of a serpent
Who slips through a wisecrack, the instant he's angled in an angel's I.
We are a million's people plagued by plague, 
Seeking some Oedipal answer to pain's riddle,
As if this heroic fraud we dub, King E-growth,
Were not the laughter of the sightless Watcher,
Amused by the eco-joke of our demise.
But Who is no Oracle, Who only darkly sees 
The catastrophe through le monacle de mon oncle,
Yet a torrent poors from the read bat of his flight ...
Heaven above, fire below, dry thunder on the horizons,
Know nothing can change these changes, they are constant.
Who too is innocent of the unexpected,
And waits at the uterine gate for Time's dilation.
Who prophets by our losses, hides his weapons,
Kills without touching all those who are touched,
And touches all who kill with great goon fortune.
Who is sevearnly times who's imperfections,
The mathematician of chaotic dreams,
The divinatory archeologist, Who digs for Who's
Imaginary relics of mesolithic, freely moving bones.
Who is the saidies of shleep in woelfish garb,
A mass of cosmetic skin stretched over words,
The mutant of sixes and sevens attempts at sex.
Who's actions are inaction's sum of actions.
That Who is all-compelling is just the speed
Of malicious insinuations, converted to quivering strings
By Time's day-parting narrow — Who's position is always far off,
Forever turned onish, the wing'dding'd boot of the footless
Aglow in moonlight.  Who will not tell you of the paradise
Of the vaporous diamond ghosting through the Now.
Who will not reconcile your reels to fadding faints.
Who is a master enslaved by frantic fatigue,
Who will nerver address you from the radiant coeur.

Canto VI
Sometimes in the crimp of dark before the dawn
I overhear this die-all-lectionwary between that teeny,
Insignificant knot me, sleepless through all the darkset
Hours of trial, and the seemingly Infinite Not-Me,
And I wonder, wandering through their separate patent positions,
If I-N-M might love this awefilled ikm, and really care 
For his sleepless ponderings, awaiting patiently 
In the hallowed darkness for somefling bright as dawn
To fuse We two in somesing so like sleep
It gleans a dream.   Do they then?  Does IT than?
Then could we sing together: If Nothing Matters,
Than inquiry karmas monsters.  Somewhats 
Do you mean arriving sneakyspeaking
Unspeechable terms of non-arrival's partings
Singing or saying I haint got no body, their mouthings
Bitting as toothlessruthlessly as some skeletal process
Dissolved through tendencies of vaporous tendons,
And only as present as never had-beens could be. 
And yet for all those still quite all-concluesinclusives,
To the ecolocating badtears of the porpoiseful,
Those many multimammals of lair and spree,
Who make these multidimensionals breathed on Earth
The fierywatery multishapes of air.  We know we have ever been
Knot glowwhere here, and yet we seem borned to say just how is is.
Open pram ( We have to come to turns with hissstory's hysterical
All-a-gorey-cults, else the Words will note nothing but tiny style points,
S  P  A  C  E  D    O  U  T  along an interminal pissed slime 
Banged froth from a misty bladder's unprecidented hero, who will never 
Volumize into the PLAY BALL! of on orbicular blissss ... close trim) peeryodd.
In the end, we had to  begin with a starry, a nunce upon that slime,
Which presupposed a kin of talltale teller, a mealy mouthless mythor
To feast our doubts on.   This Cracker was a hammerstroke of terror,
His fist communionprism boxing our hears with a violent retraction
From all those mystook Others randomly lurking past our virtual skin:
How can we kill'em, and how do we cook and eat'em.
It s'aint fair (which is always the ad dole essenc'ts' first cry
Upon kneading the pairrent's dough, but not their dull,
And they don't won't to hear the refrain, But it's fare, they blare
From the nebulous sintear of the bloody poly tics body — I — EEEEE!,
The echoecoego of the Eggrawgore, 
Whose golumgross panoptical fishsteye
Sees all our crimes through a reflexive lens, 
And says, through the cracks of his judicial scales:  
To see the sea is a lex apostata.  
The spelling of A, correctly A-Per-Say,
Is the miscreant misfeasant's Capitall abbrv brth,
A Posteriori punishable by any necessary memes of rexecution,
Which makes of this corpus cum causa corpus delecti
The nugatory nullity of a corpse.  Ipso facto hocus pocus
So B C IT: Nullum Tempus Aut Locus Occurrit Regi ...
R symtum likscat, I gas.  In brief, the child is abandoned
Afterbirth, exposed to predatory expositions.
So the king believed the oral call was nihil'd.
And yet sleep seeped these ab-horridge inknell rhymes:
O when I was a brittle boy, I lived and laughed in health,
And all the bread and cheese I grab'd, I buried in low stealth,
But in the night, a rat named Doubt,
Sniffed all my vituals out,
And now I have to beg abroad and often go without.
But when I was a little girl,
I stole into the woulds,
And there I feasted in my world
On fatted bads and goods.
Since times agoing and agone, these diametrical fairylogues
Have followed the low riddled runnels of rivers
And have leapt in luminous furckings from desert dunes.
But moistly they've meandered under dirtbeds,
Occassionally peeking forth as daysays and night rosies
To rumourously deny the common gadspells
That the king's mother was a slut, un justly because
She slept a round.   From the oldest cultures, purified
By long adherences to the outbacks of downunder,
Saved children still envision the shamememe's 
Monsoon message in Lauwd's read desert.  In stillness,
They still feel the floodstick massaging their grave cradles 
To bloom as something that flowers in solitude,
And mates the there to hear in insight's lightning.
There are bore atones hideyheydaying from lungish caverns
And suprasopranoings lilting from clouds' mouths,
And in those yEars before the singing stopped,
Such do-ettes staged magnificent Operarations.
But we must not forget, the Egregore has the longest geezertweasers
And from his throwndoom in the cranial lumin
He can pull a noworm millennial millenniums long
And coil ITs cerebraille inattentions so wrunglytrightly
That they strangle joylight.  Psst.  Lossen.  Come cluese.
I know the secret of mana's magic conceptions:
Remain indifferent to determinations.
Don't compass your content's radius with too great gravity.
Allow the lines a hint of vaporous myth,
And fuzzy up those hard historical grids.
Scare is no local mortual fluctuation,
Nor any eternal evolutional constant
That could uncrystal your Procrustean bet
So swiftly as these thoughttrons borne from love,
Which squiggle euphorically at your word's touch.
Thus does your bliss bear blooms when laws grow lax,
But not too lax lest lewdness overlean
And shadow lauding with too loose a lex:
Remember when the Judge peers from his bird-eye:
He mottos: Lex Aequitate Gaudet.
So do the lizard scales fall from his I's,
And he delights in lowering his highnass.
Consider as well how many shovelfulls 
Of precious dirt, it takes to inter rogue-a-tate a giant,
And how do you cope with the monyou mental mound?
Or when his fat is maggoted to bare bones,
How do you deal with the cavity therein?
The plasmic gasses released by such corruption
Would cause galactical comas to viscosely cluster,
And heat the child's heart with such remorse
He never could mature to adult stature,
But only bubble with momentary boils,
An instant oldster born but to be boring,
An alimentary canal with lungs, 
Nursed on thin bilkedsense and piddling in his preaches.
A paradise oblivious to its angels 
Could hardly prate of bliss without a sole.
In tumbles of brevities, the tumbling lasts.
In torrents of sounds, the soundings find their depth.
In the harshest sentence, the period marks foregiveness.
Just so,  in these books of quotes, the ghosts will babble
Their bit-sized bites of wistdoom for the messes.
Whether we shell such carnals and call them Got,
Or digest Notsure's odors from our crops,
Whether we think sHIT sparkles or call sLIT crap,
A dull mind leadens and a bright heart giggles,
And every flake that falls from our sknot's sknoseing
Displays in its hex-a-goonical uniqueness
A moment's perfection appropriately placed,
And every child warms to this cold fact.

Canto VII
See me.  Know me.  Feel IT.  Breathe IT ...
Why must R cures lurk in the murk of brain conjestshuns
O sow thick you couldn't cut them with a strife,
When all around the denbrights flash these lights
Aswishing the cheMecalls with hallelujahs?  Y?
The complex of dicipherment, supposedly as easy
As A B C, turn out and down and all around
In serpentining squarcles requiring the nomadexile archeologists
To re-sign themselves to the assiduous deafmutinymess search 
For the mouth positions made when looking at these alphabeta imps,
Which mite, in the fullness of time, the Kairos 
Or for sum, the plenitudinem temporis, as well
Have been igpay atinlay or worse, Greek or Apatchy,
Sans any stonesilent Rose sunsetta to tell us that
Our happiness depends on our feeling our fiery crucifixious Xstreamatease
As watery births in order to make earth's sojourns light as air.
When the upheaveiled stratum are with locologai straightened,
They are found to be lying in layers, not one of which
Could be illogically surmised to be or knot to be anything other 
Than initial chaos, I. E., redacted dishevelled debris —  
The damned juridical readers befuddled to be or to be knot 
Wrightously left to wallow in dog-Latin muddles 
Of doggeral dolus bonus dolus malus mottos, which tripple down
To the same insane blottoes of noxious legal briefs:
A) Rex non potest fallere nec falli.
B) Rex non potest peccare.
C) Rex nunquam moritur.
The whole riggedamarole reiterating 
The perpetual innocent infallable immortality of Heaven's EgoKing
In His most hellish and uneducaughtabull palatial manor.  Say: Law.
Well, would we say that these various small mouth positions
Sex and severnly could be seen or said to be sounded eating
Or to sometime eat or to have long since bin eighten,
The meaning's meat just so much mush regugitashun to our hatchling gizzards
By the mother buzzard, in a kin of roadkill feast, our lust's first supper,
Or should we look more deeply into the whole sickclical nature
Of nourishment and there perhopes digest
Something so aesthetically beatiful in its economy
As to assure us that the very food of suffering and death
Is, when perceived as this featherless nestling biped enjoys IT:
Bliss?   We might verily by now have transcended the belief
That beliefs are in any way productive of that Thou art that, even if
There turns or spirals or globules no elseweird to look
Or listen or hear or smell for that which is so tasteless
In the mouth, and yet so provocative as to constitute a tasty prayer.
Becost there isn't any way to believe other than through what we believe
And no way to transcend sin by such circue hilarities of the therefores therein. 
Should we except then this communion wafter when Her rose lips
Beakstir their offeratories of curassing kisses as lights of loave's diejestables,
'Though they fare fair only for those width stouTest stomach acids?  Yes, I don't think: 
We should.  ITs being impossible from any particulled dancing on the surface
To assertstain the slowly roleing eddyflying disoluting formations
Of mommydaddy's only love affair of a bodydisembodying
In sleep or death only to bode well for a simultaneous dawning,
Crowcaw and dovecoo one self same infant's cry
In the cradlegrave of the infantile senescent ... niether of whom
Could understand that search caring hiss continuously beasttoad upon the swirl,
Or why angelluck visitations inevitably begin their proclamations
With the joyfuljoking injunction of: Fear not! 
The Won who holds your many will never drop you,
Though your sunrays and your reigndays scatter amain
Upon the roiling sea of timely spaces. 
The defense of your borders is indefensible,
So why not drift to the center's whole of calm,
Where all the redoubled delights of light are lightnings
Igniting the thundersilence of great full song?
Am I the smallest fish in the big guest pond?
That's where lies want to go, in their growing psychic sorrow's
Shrinkingnest.  And why does Deadymummy
Tearment me so with these glossallyantic animacules
Whose cellular prisms scripture all lonelives 
That ark of dupel rayedbuoyed mystycness?
And why is Diddy an Xpart in tossing dice,
While Muni hides from sight in mountainous coyfs?
And wow do Y woes fructify in zhrees?
O Child, why not drink our sHebrewed wards,
OsanEing hosts of unspeachable affections,
They are the milkywise of human kindness
Divinely glittering through mortal breath,
Making the accidents of dustiny
Words feted to reward eternity. 
Weave it to US to sere, Your tree's releaved,
Your strips of flesh, intered in Vultured air,
Lift rightly to revveil your skilletall spirit.
That cuntfree bumpedkin ballooning his poppollutions
In the senile siddhis of overt cerebrations
Grows green to the gills in climatological stupors,
But MeMaw and Fortheirs never abort their caresses.
Their ceaseless stratigraphic calibrations 
Will ever closely calipher your bubble
Sphering its surface prism with sweet at tensions,
Though Nothing presses in and presses out,
Except the breathing of your aphabirths. 
Yes, many hallucinating syntacticians
When faced with this babel will make an A Z mistake,
And drug their adjuncts through boring complements
Squeezed tighter than a wroomby boobie hatch.
These hot-lot entergalactic mediums, so insubstantiating
To such matters, still budget the matter of your tune-I-verse,
By half forgetting that voided bury center, 
To veer off on a gaseous host of tangents, 
Attempting to diagrim their own life sentence. 
And who, pretell, is this, who will insist
That to conflate suffering with night and night
With such inconsequential  doublings of light's
Knot knowwings is the very how of bliss and terror's mating,
Is the very vox diveina vanity that lowers its proud humanity
In singing, humiliated so by solitude that all the towers
Of sleep come tumbling down, in chorushes of souls
Whom Glow One knows?  The uttered impracticality
Of such beauty has marked its beast as this absurdity
Who, after Time's interminable corruptions,
Unites its corpse's dust and  flexsplit tongue
In an incompatible rage to unleash praise.
The riotous disshevelments of death,
Which brought such agony to the egotest's flesh,
Nod into non-existence as this voice
Lullagoodbyes ITs sweet parental soothings.
None of IT never was an is that happened,
But all is hopening in an instant's glory.
Question: Who comes before us to question these catachisms?
We say IT is Atman Roi, the sole hour Creatricks.
Questscum: Why is his heart the light test of 3 feathers?
We say IT's because he's the laziest simpering simpleton.
Guesssham: What shounds are hummed to kabbal shiz unification?
We shay we should shun tu murmore shush memilked mouthings.
This then is the meditation We implore of the non-Platonic
Non-solidities breezing through breathy lazings of non-being
With all the ease of light passed through a Qwuartz!
So shayeth the afterZen shamings of AdMend Raw —
Sheshat's hissed signature of all genderational write things.
Are you sick?  Are you pigged in mirey muck at dirt's dark doer?
Conserve you victual energy, and pull your lips
Into the easy  smilings of duncing alpha bits;
Laugh, and you won't forego the electric cleansing
Of every pesky cancerous mute station.
In the morgue, of crass, just ice preserves the flash,
But that's knot the windy winding to salvation,
As every crucifixing co-mic shows.
And every oracle orifice of the body continues
To cell its own failts bail of goods,
Even when all their campstars flicker: Doubt.
They say that their humores relie on missed understandings
As the rose of sunset is mirrored in lakes of ice.
They say they but harmonize the midfright's looncry,
That their soundblights, like pigs in a sack
Grunt forth such lights, their very tongue tides
Snort a beaconing glitter, like starbursts winking ON a sea of thInk.
They say that the beauty of their chancey voice
Rings forth its proofs in endless fractious forkings.
And though their serpent arguments are poxy —
Hidden in almosts, yet glinting forth as maybes —
They say such sinyou osscities cure disease.

Canto VIII
Some Slatternstag night quite soon now your postadolescent
Scansion will be sliezed with the inspiration to escape
The cindarblack city and precede up the ever ruggeder coast —
Which will groan ever bleaker as it grows ever cliffnodier ... 
But wince, prytell, could you be about to be goning?  And Y
To that legendary tavern that your fearfarthers were always
Extolling with their seasless blather?  I know you don't know,
But could you?   So, climbing in your antique jitney hot rod 
Off you go, plusplunging into wilder and whiledoor fog bunks,
Glowing more and mare windily torn by ragged birdshrieks
And jagged moonbleaks, untill  you will finally, almost imperceptably,
Be there, under that kneeon pube sighn: Do Droop Inn.
And crossing that hanky tank's crowdid parking Lot — 
Entirely paved with old crushed battlecaps,
Their logode mentals pallisheed with loonbright — 
Your Y will pass you through where Afrodightly blues 
Slew sinuous Osannas for the lust of the great fright dopes.
And there, in this MEadscented lair of fleemalewarmth,
You may, future contritioned in tensepest relucksaytion,
Meet on his barstall the one you've been lacking for,
The king you might have been had you been born one.
His face, such as it may have worddally been, might be
Curiously dupel luminmated with those bier signs
Which tranceversely frontback shine from the jukejoint's wails.
And so, though you may willtry to seenly listen, the blue's band blaring
And the neon glarings will slur his optimist misssage with irony.
Strange Sir, I am not going to rale you my nom de plume,
Because we here who have been waiting so long
For your surrival have ascertained that it will be
Far more enjoynable for all our pleasures for you to gas it.
Could you?   Check the baremaid's eyelights for your highsighn.  
See, they shine two.  They say: You're fourordained to be here, 
Hearing.  And it's true, at least philosophically true,
That that which is changing in your heart of starts
Is lastthing that and nextthing this with such velocity
That you cannot think which which has caused which which,
Except that your I is different now than it will have then
Seamed to have been being.   So, now you think, I have proseeded
My preseed stochastically so that my treetime arrow
Has uprooted as much as it has sprouted underleafings,
As many choirs of cupids in the dirt as devils' appalls
Dangling in the air, and yet their polyphoneyhymns sound sweetly,
Mated together in my loafing leer, their lacrymal lyrics,
As much as I dare unwound them, seeming to smatter:
Laugh and the sworld laughs with you, pry and you croon:
A Loon!  Naturely, or should we slay, more tally,
The polyhymnal when happening to have been pollypollitcull
Will often rotten the readright sweetlight fruit,
It too used to being the notsure of autumn to fall into winter
Before it can spring in some her, and the whole male
Mad diss a maul that had seemed to be so medicinal 
May well nigh poison you with early death, 
His doctered plague the breath's massked deconception
Of what it might have meant to be happily free.
Fond hope, and when the joint is jumpin' with dancin' upright,
Leadin' to downtight sparkin' in the booths, and under
The moonlight in and out of cares, caressin' steamin'
To bee the hummdinger order of the way with one sting
Leadin' to another in these pleasantkissed of coital stimulations,
Larvaling through uterine simulations with each as like to all
As bees can be, may you not wonder why, Y Stranger, Sir?  
Why the mysterious, distant nom de plumage?  
And Y the need to flee the sindary city,
This need for a conditional future tavern, 
With its genderous spawn spating from lip to lap, 
Whose fusions from the first were no doubt fissured.
The very pullulation of populations perpetuating wise cracks,
With quips that started quarking light to light, trailing the quickest snarks,
Which after midnight burgeoned to genuine differance,
The siblings growing odder to each bother, each envyloathing the self
They'd not become, hence, the inevitable sappysad birth 
Of the blues ... and not a few fund fist fights ... the three dolor bill
In your wallet spent on spillage, and the dance floor dense
With post maylaying debris.  The fiat Let there be light,
In the twinkling of a smithereened neon shardness,
Will be blinking the sloganese of Let there be fight.
Thus bits of bits may fiendish what whole holes startolled.
And Stranger, Slur, left bereft of your All-together,
Where beat and beaten lie heaped in bloody spoils,
Would best be divested of your personhoodies,
And, exiting the tavern, pace through loonlight,
Embarassingly skinned in rhetorwreck's toils,
Butt accepting of your exile's mass Xstinkshone,
As an honest leper might excerpt his boils.
Still, what is the pace of escape when your hot rod deflates?
Well, musically, Andantino, a waking stroll,
But waltzed 2, 3 to 4, through the fogmist septarch
Of every prism's sweet chromantic keys,
Alone in the night on the cliff above the Sea,
Content with the raving peace of Her fine galed gestures,
And pregnant with all Her possibilitease.
The Word conceived as last's first mythic music,
The very organone of the heartful mind,
The momentarry climatological Goddress,
Naked of substance, yet clothed in space and time,
The sheflesh of ull Sir's sexual phantomseas
Her scriptocontinuo unceasing its flowing fundation
Infused through the ideal instrument of twined bodies,
And sounding fourth their deep Aeolian harpings,
In subtle surging roarings of their breathings
Through pristine freedom's volitilities ... 
That dull Saussurean sense of simple signage
Transformed to this ClassStarier soul of silence.
But O, this silence is ripe as that dovlish appall
Readshifting to those echoes of burning blues,
And tracing serpentlighttails dissappearing
In contrails of a gossamer whispering,
Spidering lines of finest imaginings,
And blinking the nomad stars in constellations,
Beyond those mists where primal lovers move.
And so, the senescent cronemantics outsoar the cliffs,
Split from those stony sequent prose-a-ditties
To roam the spherish simultaneities.  Say: Awe!
Yes, yes, as the barstooler would have sad from his
Unlightened post sit-on, while crossing o'er the bar,
That we're mixing the crap out of all our metaphors, 
But what he doesn't know — O how could he? —
Is that's the best why to fertilize poetry's posies,
Our noontide garden rising incongruously 
Right from the turbulance of the midnight sea.
And you forgive, as if you'd never groaned,
Those partying genetails obscenely scrawled
On the tavern bathroom's pornographic walls,
Those old codes of the disembode's Mon Venus
Pierced by the grossest pre-a-peean fail Us,
And labeled by Loathe's most stankdefying Word(s),
4-tabrood than the Tetragrammaton.  AHOH!
The cry spouts out from that oppressive crest:
Now ALMOST DUN, and still so much to do!
Wheel have to crush the space, and sphere the time.
Even the vastest ocean of mystory 
Will yield its surfaced depth when the pillakin's beak
Dives from the skies to spare what it needs to feed,
And hits the very point blind gravity picks,
By folding flat the plumbage of its flings.
Forego the path of paraphenalia purges,
And find your whole by adding up your zeros,
Since nothing was, your nothing is will do.
How could the prize of predatory plunges
Not bring about the nom de plumer's peril
Unless he peers through ruination's swirls?
Of course, the barstool, evacualled, still smells fleshy,
But that's the ancient odor of this world,
A toilet's venereal stabs at wise graffiti,
Which will not bare a scrip yourall scrutiny.  So,
Beneath these depths you quite forget recalling.
Peak through the fog to the verse's moonlit fraysings,
And see how the blurs glow silver when they're read.
But seek not hastening's ingratitudes
Even in seaswell miseries read: Glad tidings.
Put off Thy shows from off Thy shorny feats,
These benthic realms denote most Holy ground,
Your under standings will but swerve you: Hear.
You left the slity, No Exit from this dive,
Which only spawns absurdity's Satremizes,
This fun dement is where you lunged to breathe.
Suspend your tongue in soullute's salivation
And taste the possible sweetness of salvation,
We know shoulds seam conditional, but you could.
There's nothing in this I-Ching of spaced crimes
To put your finnied feathers out of joint.
Meat birthed your fall; her meeting mirths new starts:
Messfortune drowns the brain, wild bliss floats hearts.

Canto IX
Sign posted at loutback desert watering haul:
Attention: Cloudly truth reflection on surface
Is truthbane to deeperseeker drunkards
Of subsurface trenditionating truths.  What?
Pitiless sunblights skatespinning on skum
Keep blinding the deaf and speaking for the dumb.
Oooh, the cartoon is a pout to begin,
Which with disneying brights will spin all tikes to bleeps.
Exquisite playtime ensues with swiftly spiraling
Sexplanations, quite too much to entertain
The eye and quite too mesh quiet to satiate
The ear, shiny jewelry of flickering inductions
Mated to flowing hypnotician's soothings.
Joy's jouisance injected in willess sub-jects
By rhetoritician's programming prop prograndas,
As genital gratiations radiate psychorrheaic paralysis.
Orbiting Reptile CreHater Demiurge propogates negative 
Human emotions, hiss sserpentine forked tongue
Licking hiss lisspless chopss with appetive frenssee.
Space everywere quick-timed with his aderteasing jingles,
All of which summarize for the E-motijied damned bland:
The Great Harvest is at hand.  Are you ready?
Pronto.  Speak to me, O, Prostituting Potentate,
Protect me from my lizardy alien Me. 
Lay down your lewd.  O my bevolvèd Trekker,
Would it calm you to know that this whole hole
Is all that remains of the collapsed sealing 
Of a once Greet Shopping Maul? and that 
Its toxiCity derides from the resinous remains
Of canniballistically consumed consumers,
And here, in this very now, there once upon a crime
Seethed the lust of the methane cloud
Expelled from the Ainsoph anuses of billions and billions served,
Who may well have come into their job-world naked,
But returned to Mine Noh-Whirled elegauntly clothed 
In taxpleadoes, wedding goons,
Glossed slippers, vampyre capes, air skits 
With poly yester layers, bright Spindex thongs,
Paste eyes for male titties with spangles on 'aum,
Bras in all seizes from zed to A,
Nitres, winks, and foolish one-feathered chapeaus.
And it might rile you to know, my Puzzled Pizzle,
That in their last go-round their shoews mismatched,
And legged in differing directions, their siddhis dispersed,
Butt leaving this trackless waste, where sins are
Each forgotten, and One None remains to hate or to forgive.
Look around, not a spec of green to disturb the sandy beige,
Not a burd or a wird to sing, not a cricket to saw his legs,
Nor a Christ to cross nor a notion of lost love.
Welcome, my Lonely Fealty, to Paradise,
Where all your insaned deaferances are saned.
You may read the dead deadlines in my Morning/Evening Stares:
Orthodox Finish Holocaust.  Pious Troubadours'
Swan-Songs Re-Virginate Previous Whores.
Rong Rambling Recitashuns Efficiently Puncted.
That we have devoutly murdered all orgiastic fornicators, 
That we have postseeded the preceding flaccids' funeral,
That we have prostated priapian primate frenzy, 
That our one hole has plugged all others,
That we have bespangled the enemy camp
With the jewelry of cadaver-swarming flies,
That we habitate the above and have left the below and between
In subserfluous darknesses,
That we have chosen wisely, killed schleep,
Eradicated dreams, built this celestial palace
Of horizons on the alabastard sands of powdered bones,
That we have refused mutation, that we have banished night,
That we have retched the wished-for consumation,
That we have returned to the star of our origins,
The Venitians of a Martial destiny.  Say: Ha!
What!  Stop!  Would you have me perpetually stopped up!
I will eliminate you like an old fat man's waiste,
I will piss you in the wind.  I will drink this desert's poison
As my desart.  I will turn green, and puke colors
Brighter than all your fakery jewelry.   
I will preserve the heart and tongue of the heresiarch,
And will take my chances as they happen to cum.
I will cast provisional doubt on effect-caused causes,
And will shock my emotions from your timelost womb.
With mocking devotion, I will eat pain's communion wafer,
And drink the wine of pleasure from my passed blood.
I will skeptisize your desert of out-thereness,
And prepare a trackless wilderness of brambles
From the highway of your golden proclamations. 
I will embrace the part of you you've hidden,
And love the leperous sores which pock your skin.
If silenced, I will resort to fingerspelling,
And sing through a gestural alphabet of spasms.
Be assured, my Leige, that the eccentric
Does not of necessity degenerate disorder.
By a process of mythamimical probabilities,
From a bag of light balls and of dark bulbs,
I will calculate my inharmonic mean.
I will emit my rapid radiant bursts
From blasts of magnatears, 
And reappurturb your unperturbed liebations.
I will renounce my will and let you reign.
O, Sire Sun risen, kneel, and let us ray.
Heave Inly Leader, Deveined Mooder,
Fiend, Beloathèd Gode, Doo Dung this forest
Archheard of mutual fruits,
And proliferate to every needful starveling
Our floweirdly flummeries; make phamous
Our phoppish phoams, but protect our legendary
Hermit See.  It is not meat that some should know us
Without heaving eaten of this feast thereof.
Let billions and billions be served, 
And having strolled naked through this voluminousnest,
Let their timeline be invested with its bulging.
What is a year or a millennial million
To the species of trilobytes in the ancient oceans?
It is only change  in the twingfling of a cry
That births new forms in the terrors of sleeping deeps.
Let us sink long galleries into ruined earth,
Segment their serpent windings with chiseled portals,
And suture stray crevasses with tranceverse slabs.
Our women have been reduced to necklessed breasts,
And we have abandoned the rituals of birth
For the crazy rites of fetal trepanning.
When sperme spout and woome-subject are, 
Connecting spirit is: Polarization,
Selection, harmonization, individuation ... 
So will this light which animates all the desert
Forgive our arrogant stabs at systemization.
Let us be adament in our desolve.
Let us be childlike, balkative, loving, independent.
Let us resist the yoke of the golden bOX,
And explore the jokes of our labyrinthine tempers,
For that which is funnish is ornamentative cruel-work,
So let us delightfully needle one another.
Let us be scrupulous in our lack of foresight,
Assume the worst, yet only accept the best.
Let us not solemnize our texts 
With the Strunken Blights of rampant amputations,
Nor lex our exuberdance with rank abbriefsummations.
As a mountain, however exalted, but elevates earth,
Let us abase our graceness as modest mummers.
So by the Ogre, Megasizing Power, and by our MaterUs Mouthers,
Let us daring-do what we damned well bleed invein  — 
Dance lives of living light, and sing:
Awemain.

Canto X
What!  Could here be the trinatarian improblation,
Triply alight as the daystar of the heart?
Here are two ones, mated in love's glowing pulses.
Look aground, you are not bound manyless,
You are freeing, where listening is a dazzling
Kin of counting, and the I's are blinded 
By the mind's encirclings, elipsinging
Crammedfumations of computations 
Relentblingly written in the mass equations
By hiss stories' theomanic mathematicians:
The line is volumized, the volume's sphere
Grows inus inan abstract spouting of numb blurs,
Not the signs of the times, but the sings that mark the time
In a musewicking flaming of dancing heresiarch saints, 
As sane in their sunborn sbinding ingyrations 
As their insane proliferations divine them to be.
Here neither bespins nor sblends,
But here the sinses, destRoyed in resurrections, 
Expire in fires of infinite expansions.
Form matters in de-smatters of privations
Of manifesting miracles' potenshalls,
And everyclear the seers in the centear
Are breaking the golden chains of necessity,
Wherein time fooled the eyes and plied the ears
To the everorganically changeling of delight
Whose stayseas difference eternal instants.
The aspirant adolescent stands agasp,
And all the ironic dearth idealing zeals 
Melt in a newd mnaturing of the mnind.
Now, whatever shehe dives in this sea of sums,
Will nerver flail again, for neither upped nor downed,
Nor blacked nor frothed ingravitates 
Their elemental body, and if they float
Inside a virtual human, they stay the vaporous
Effluent of this light, while all their earthly mess
Infames within.  Oh, Nobly normformed reader
Of these rousings, observe the secret Word's resuscitating, 
Let knot its lexing ruels grow over lax.
During your mourning absolutions, 
Recite one thoudand times,1
For the sustenance of your socialadened sylph.  
If you would grow a temple of crowning powers, 
Recite too2 another thou spand times
To darn your dreamed nocturnals to one throne.
At the meridians of noon3 and midnight4
Recite at each another thousand rhymes,
This breaks the gripes of all of your groan addictions
Through the fulfillment of your deeps' desires.
At the full5 and at the new6 moon dilatingly
Resigh allgain your thousend recitations,
And such will heal all symptoms of all diseases.
When entering7 or when departing8 siddhis,
Or passing through fields9 or forests10, 
Traversing water11, or trekking through
A desert of trackless dunes12, recite
Your thousand, thus the adversary's
Twelvefold labyrinth that defused
Your painful wounderings through confusion,
Will brilliantly disclose the youknit verse.
The bunker of earthly riches is exposed,
As an elevation of delusive terrors,
And the twiced birthed body revives the plancental twin
Of the merciful Mother's every-breathing bloody.
In this cumulus sky incelled by her ovulation
Where your sperms dispersed 
On their millionmammalian journeys,
The cusp of your milkywaves' new mystic dentitions
Will cut and crush oppression into starflight.
Right out of the mouths of babes, this metaNow
Becomes a mutter of uttered wholinest,
And the guard imprisioned in his own rock Job
Will be chrystold to stardust by the Godfree cyclone.
Retune to the Epoch re-inozation protrusion,
Then pivot there, and here you may discover
Time's first implosion, its lowest frequency
Of sum-vibration.  Sea how the water of life 
Is being ejected in jets from Mind's first massives, 
Escape the black compression of grave-ity's crush
In a lazered mazer of liquid's first baptiding.
This is as simple as thinking back to thoughtless.
This hole, though invisible to sense, is nowhere hidden,
Any mumbler tumbling through luck is apt to find IT.
You can count on it with the flingers of one scan
Through any scriptureledger of spirit legend.
Stop now, you can't, but slowly keep ongoing,
Tack all the spacetime kneaded to read this flowing.
Yes, you are hungry, but put that pang aside,
You have to allow your yeasterdaze to rise,
Before you can feed on the manna of strife and breath.
Albeit psi-sight alone sees  U.P.A's.,
Still the Ultimate Philosoph Adom is Eved away
In the M.A.P. of our Micro Allround Perception.
These geometricmillamotionmusics have seven
Numbered shapes, to wit: the spike group,
The dumb bell, the tetrahedron, the cube,
The octahedron, bars, and last, the stars.
And when you finally swim lingustic's depths
You will yourself become what you ob verse:
The self-illumined animacule of beauty.
This All is as easy as any 1,2,3,
Its questshines aglow through numerical permutations.
7 x 12 is 3 and 12 is 3, 
If this does not ignite your admiration,
You will never thrill to arthmagic's alleglories,
Or ever be numbered among the blissed elect.
Each number is limit, but Number exceeds all limits,
And so the odds and evens of the Self,
In wake or sleep sequent this infinite ease,
Which has no equal in the zero ego.
Yet who are you, you ask, who mars the time
By rhythmically clocking collusions of clacking bones,
Bestirring the ruined flesh with last abstractions?
No spirit ever knows that it is dead, 
Nor ever tunnels through the tuberous veins 
To find lost loves revived in its dry heart.  
I am the dark-skinned man, the idiot boy, 
The invalid old woman in her wheelchair.
I am Ezekiel in his rainbow van, 
Driving around the wheel of heaven's crown.  
I am the prophesized surprise
Predicted by the ghosts of preterite numbers.
Of what is spoiled, I am the restitution.
Sun of recuperation and generation, 
When death sets flesh adrift, my gentle touch
Breezes felicity beyond all joy, 
Subtracts the cold from ice, frees every torpor.  
I am decay's defeat, regret's demise.  
I am that darkish bolus of food's waste, 
Which worms through time's interminable digestions.  
I am that glistening thing, which lies, unprized, 
Yet feeds the rose that makes all lovers sing.

Canto XI
Haigiopoorknowgraphic nuove vite
Stripped of all sanity for sanctity,
And naked of everthing but sunstrokes,
The Who who has deducted the I from we,
And made of the we a family 
Inclusive even of vermin clans of lice,
A nitwit in holely ordures, disgustedly shunned
By every enthralled societal dissedorder,
Indecent promulgator of that joke
Derided by status mongers and stateless mongrels
But choired continuously by those bright seraphs
Who sing that love is all the is there is.
Bare feet are afoot, and this scion of fopfashion
Ass certs: Father, disrobe me,
For I care not what you own.
I no longer want my skin in your halfling game.
Well, as the great meriticked Martin Luther 
Royallye proclaimed: You can't keep
Doves from flying overhead, but you can stop
Crows from nesting in your cares.  So,
Who wants to know if you have properly assessed
The value of repetitions, or if
Repetitions of value have been assessed properly,
Or if you have made the prediscovery 
Of the oriental zero audaciously awaiting 
This 'umble one — volume some, chapter one, page none, 
In the encyclopedia devoted, if not to martyrdom,
At least to the desert nomad's thirst for such. 
You stand before the caitiff decapitator 
Proclamming the victory of your nakeness 
Over his jeweled goldbroidered insultanate robes —
Just one of your marital infidelities,
Your piece on the side, No-Lady Poverty,
Which earned you nothing but your seive-like hands
Through which the sands of prayer leaked out your years. 
It is a wise ass who knows that his brother donkey 
Is as stuborn and as sterile as a mule.
Which reminds me of the tail of the Bible peddler,
His pitch: Most High, all-powerful, all-good Lord, 
All praise is Yours, all glory, all honour, all blaststings.
To you alone, Most High, do they belong. 
Know: Mortal lips may wratherly bleep Your Name.
But I gotcha right here, in this here THICK BLACK BOOK.
And here he tries to corral his poor dumb ass,
Which is head-shy from her Lord's abuse, poor thing,
Weak in the knees too from toting that heavy pack,
And he smacks her around a little, takes out the Book,
And outshouting the animal's tortured HeeHaws, hawks:
Praised be You my Lord with all Your creatures,
Especially Sir Broker Sum,
Who is the day through whom You give us slight.
And he is beautiful and radiant with great splendour,
Of You Most High, he bears the likeliness.
But what do you care, you, sitting in the Art Film House
In your radical student hiphuggers, so proud of your unkempt hair,
Your head fitted with it's black and white flickering hellmet,
Peering through eyesouls at the sinama screen, 
And mooching your Marxian grouches, but Zenly not-knowing
If this Great Detective bent over your donekey head,
Is reality or dream.  You only know that N. said: God is Dead,
And the film depicts that better than the sun,
The moon film of black and white aflicker on silver,
Your sister-self in artificial night,
Your larger than life escape into a depression
Adorned with intellectual analysis.
Well, what goes aground comes asound,
The reel of film in the Cannes,
Must rerepeat renditions, the communion snack
For your greatest masculine passion, which is:
To look productive while being lazy — 
The Great MotherLover's mysticult master bait,
The moonlight's aesthetic of filmy magical charms.
Oh, this Lady of Poverty, has left you out,
She has not counted you among her elect,
Nor censussed you among her angels dancing
Upon the microcustoms of her heirpin. 
It's not that the movie was ever going to end,
But you exit the Art House womb
Into blinking sunblind, not all together unhappy
That for a moment, the tortured Goddess
Has touched and pierced your palms.
Ah, there is read, there is blood,
There is impotence drained, 
As an old man's memory bleeds youth's joys again
Because he believed then,
Believed in his own redemption,
Even while nailed to the raft of his cynicism.
He believed that his passivity-bred failures
To swim in society's turbid turbulant stream
Was a virtuous tribute to scorning lover moon
And her tides of verses that made his life a drowning.
If you listen, you can hear him, as if bloasting:
I have pursued a Don'terate in all dispensible careers
But only to the ainth abortiveness and never to the nth
Which leads to birth: I have ineffectually pondered
The law of that which is slight yet endlessly suggestive
And found no further mothering my nightscares.
I have neurolinguistically piddled in helling arts,
My miracle cures mere bubbles in foamless wakes.
When psychic surgery fomented mutilations,
I applied the shock of verbal therapuetics,
And conducted Frankenstainean experiments
On this inner child preceding the outer's naming.
I set out to save the world's first kindergarten
And fell into that ecolegible hole where nature
And my nurture cratered inward.  I lived
In the heatdeath of the cold volcano
Examining the Urphänomenschwa
Of white and black, and fared to fear them both,
Fine-tuning read in the dastardly daedal blights.
On political polemics I honed my skills,
Purswaying no one in endless virtual squabbles.
No pundit pastor ever misled his flock
More thoroughly than I lost my 99;
Though I practiced myriad methods of meditation
I never excavated my soul's gold.
I mastered plagjury for poetic splendors
Whose treasures I usurpated as my home.
I labored toilessly at idleness and temporized
To jelly my own bones, and in the screeds
Of sexy flesh deletes, I sowed my seeds
Upon impermeable stones.  Still, still ...
In all that flailing about, there was a merraige,
A three-in-one spousal of matter and form and privation,
Which drenched my constant woundedness in grace.
The ruindumb has always been my muse,
My bright blond daughter, silent as diamondshine
And absent of everything but wistdom.
Always she curls my serpentine sequencings 
Into the loving coil of our shared heart.
Whenever I close my eyes, her angel comes,
And speaks abundantly of darkest matters,
Her wavelengths longer than largess gale lexies,
Which thermalize the vacuous colds of space,
And frequency largos of time's lost lightless music.
Bones being the housing of the animal soul,
I forged my musical instruments from these relics.
Who says that I am wrong for doing so?
For everyone knows that the hand of glory
Is used by burglers to put the house to sleep.
You wrap the hanged man's hand around the candle,
Of his hollowed femur fueled with his own fat.
Whatever they steal is filled with sequestered time,
Those fateful moments theived from eternity,
Projecting that divination known as legend.
All of the lives of saints, with one exception,
Are fashioned from such convoluted rites.
Danger awaits for those who would overgovern
With merely human analectics.  Who say,
And record in writing what they say:
We are not birds nor beasts, and if The Way
Prevailed as it does with them,
Then men would not need to force the world to change.
I speak as a specialist in mental illness,
Lovesick with my own lackings,
And you must listen with a special holeness.
My ego takes pride in future accomplishments
Like the growth of my hair and nails in the silent tomb,
But I know better than to own these words,
Or claim that my saintly corpse will exude perfume. 
A journey of 3 is reduced to the primal coupling
When someone like you or me deletes one fault,
That I have done, although the cracks remain.
My blessings exude like sap from such zigzag faults
I can no more depart from my nature, however bee-nuded,
Than can the fall of water, the flight of fire, 
And whatever I am or do through these Xcursions, 
IT is hummed through the virtue of my honied shame.

Canto XII
Shame honed my virtues through humming Lit incursions,
To-do's am I that sever — fires of flight, 
Waters falling in strands,
I in deed ever house knotNature's mayas.
From depart's lessness to no can sees, through faulted
Zigzagg-caves, Platetonicaly zapped,
My blesstings Xude from mirrormeditations, 
Their hermit-hereticals leaving so many cracks ... 
My fractured who in broken sobs must ask:
Is this the original flash or its reflection?
The thunder US music or its reverbing echo?
Ho-High speaks low from the multimetaphor mill,
Whose whills in more than duple opposings spin:
Gear up their churnings to grind whEats' heads to flower,
And ever bake capacious lackbird pies,
Which fly and sing when 'oped by ego's king.
Oh, note, Dear Reader, that this Pi rings round,
And round rings round its round, like peacock eyes,
That arguswitness all our rungs and rites.
We're watched by SheHe's farther-matter-friend,
And sunfuntastic, we renounce our pride,
However beautiful it's irridescence
For the indescribable love-dirt of that grave
Of everything that was or is or well be.
New-radiant in surrender, servile to Time,
We blaze our mites to shine eternally.
Here is the whine of wayfaring communion,
The voice of the doubt that says: Take,
This is my coarpse, given to kill that too-more-
In your crotch that grows its harvest
Of temporalizing pain, so that you might —
With ease — slide up to heaven, arrived
Before you know it, consumed by bliss,
Without the torture of an arduous climb.
What!  
Is ours to be the tail of consumables,
Of flambeaued faiths devoured,
But in-diejested, a cannibal heartburn
Caused by an heratic's heir?  Should we
Let live, when pain has left our cells,
And first have rid that beam from our blind I
Before we cooked our enemy-twin's  goose flesh?
Is this great apprehension that we feel,
At the demise of all our multiples,
Come down to this one test: 
Are we Glob fear or faring?
Oh glisten, Lover, and omit that ore,
And all the gold that is will be your mine! 
This is the what you climbed for, Now, enjoyn IT.
You're old luuuung fail has finally breathed it's lust,
Your lizardy readflexed terrors gone extinct.
By means of the paradoxes of the poem,
You have become the aesthetic paradise.
Cathartic content and angelic form
Have dynamode you in their whirling force,
And cast off every movement which could die.
In consort, let us pry.  Nunce upon a crime,
There waste an Atom, and this claymation
Was hidden like a book within that sane look's covert,
A synchronous peacock pearched on a symble branch,
In template only, its lines unfulfilled by anything
But thInk.  This Book is our holeist Rook
Of avain Numb Blurs.  Attend to what LIT quotes:
I AM THE GUARDIAN OF FLIGHT
LEAVE THE FIRST OF THE FORCED TWIN MEATINGS ON CYCLE OFF'S
TWINNED MATINGS IN THAT SYCLE OF TWELVE SWOONS.
LOOK!  LOOK INTO THE READ LIES OF YOUR GOD!
Or somedimlikdot.  Uncroack. 
But may be one won some one, 
For from that page we hear: 
Rise bye your Cilia through my microskry.  
Thus,
A fungust mob was spreading laughed and write
Long ragged flings, and from their bury center,
Two redeye suns spun clear.  It was a Bad.
The vampire of the blood of pulsing Time.
Jesus is crucified.  But why, My Drear,
Are you talling us this glory?   Becurst
In peacocks I's you durst belive.
I ask now, what is Atom, but kindled sparks
Debtdamned with a  physique?  
O now I seem a willess wheel bespunning 
A marely hypnothetical kind of pairsun,
Living in I solation through numberless tears,
My millennia of media lendjestics
A chronic chronicfall of solutetude.
Have I become unNaturall,
Wriding a glossary of the long fore bidden?
Has my biologos mystery bin halted,
My evilutional self volcanoed to ash
More sterile of life than crematoria smudge?
May be, but know: My microspider lives,
Casts forth Her silken spinerets of words,
And on that fuliment spun from my own gut,
I climb Empyrean stratospheres of sighs.
In every first inflammatory epoch,
I weave primordial quantum fluctuations
And from my simples make diverseness rise.
Dead ash transgrasses to a living LAWn,
Fun facts tact madly through intestinal wind,
Yet I remyth serene within my blends,
Impervious to the mystique of a future
Whose messianic magnet rules the past.
Instead, I catch all flylings in my knet,
Their buzz a signal for my feeding friendzy.
I dislocate calendrical festivals
And burn all cities, save Dionysia.
Ah, sleepless seer of my sleepless fire,
Cool and collect my ME  into fine vapors,
And spread its music with your breathing breezes.
Blank.  
What? 
The page through the lairport
Is silent, the music is blank.
The attractor patterns from energies
High and low are knoiseless and invisible,
And Holy in-descernable to the senseless.
When you see Z as A, C too as one,
The B that buzzes in your alphanet
Feeds on the blank and weaves more spacetime, finely,
It's all as simple as any one to three.
And way twoot sweet four death's glum tragedy.
In this — my Churl Fort Stress — I fake my stand:
As one divined with imbecility.
No paradise exists of absolutes, 
Which is why Wisely's quasi-hissy vox,
When blipped-bleeped from a vacuum,
Poors froth the plenumous milk of galaxies
To nurse Here numberless spawn of entities.
And when her He intrudes upon her matter,
Dis-stabilization puffs her bling to powder,
And from that dust her fuss begins fresh ends.
The axiom is clear, its meaning blurred,
Why should a 1 and 2 a too and won,
Conflate to mate two threes of wive and sex?
And why should that cooked goose crushed on the palate
Nourish with her misfortune his mal blood?
Power expands regressively to zero,
And from that knotted dot all bliss distends.
Who speaks has spoken, his tongue has fueled a flame
Whose every substance dies into its glow.
That which has been, is that which Eveher became:
Long lists of epithets 
Named as shame's infame.

Canto XIII
Imagine.  That's the wik kit.  Imagine 
That these instanfeignyiss ascenshams
To the next lazars of Heaven's elevations
Are best consweptualwised as numb-aerial summations,
Jeweled abstractions of circling, dancing, brightening expose-cuelators
Of airmythmiticall proofs that are simply improovious 
To immargination, your inner I bling-blinked bloody blind
By the spectumal slide of hisstory that seams
To start from a perflect sunny Atom.  When? 
Before that ribbing that made him as imperfict 
As his progenisprousalizing lEaVE.  Then?
Why, then, then, my Lung Foreslacken,
To our for-Christ-sake plusperfact super sonny,
After the ripping that spared his hymn inside.  
The two are as like and as different as bloodvinegar,
Both sopped by the selfsamed scrapturallinked smarts
Of the mighty polygamist, whose golden wizzdooms,
Though unsurpissed by all wee lustfilled mortals,
Are nothing so touched as Apha pupa's begotten,
Or cleansed by Omega Scion's sacrificed sangue.  
Imagine.  What?  Await a mowment, 
And permit me to ambiguate with my many
Ambulating permutations.  Take Ob. Scene sex.  Role 'em.
Are you following?  Or hour you too week to discover
That after Sumday, the swircle terms round and black
To that old weakbend Saturnalia
That the Chosen celebarate as the Sabboath,
And the Saved won't venerate as their findall One.
Git IT?  No, not in a month of Slumdaze,
You reeling won't.  But they're all there, 
The sequestrial scars — brightly conflated,
And as constipatedlycocoonstellifated
As any Litall or even Big Doper could be.
How licky your are in your nightly snacking mode
To account your self among the fortunate foamous.
No viceorall revelation knead apply.
You must merely stir the sighfears alltogether
And cook the Holy Books, the communial recipe's
Queasy as Won, Too, Free.  Just counter sign your prime
That you have been denominated 
To decimeal the lamb chop, 
All of your fractold frictions in toto integraded, 
And no more marked for zerowizesing Death.
You need no longer fear your cursafiction,
Nor the strangling noose of inquisitive heresy,
Nor the doom of doubt, nor the Nuclear BOOMB cryptear.
Nor all the stigmata counted by fingers in palms
On all the holely hands entwinned in prayer.
You need not count on any ring at all
Because your circling cipher is assured.
Nothing can hurl you, therefore you fear Nothing.
Ann Nihil, your bribe, your lovelorn Xultation,
Has called you panting to the rousal chamber,
Do knot be loathed to cum
Where two will lie togather twhined as one.
Look hear, Slummy Voyd, if Lewed Almighty
Thunders:  Roll up your selves and blend over!
He's not bum stirring you.  Just let me say: IT,
So that you don't succumb 
To those let there be light innocuosities
In lieu of authentic hydrahomophobias: 
Fare God.  Y fear 'err?  SHe's only the forking answer
Two those questshowns, the really Earthy ones,
Within whose solar mouthes, the Dark Mess chews
Bunches of die gripes, and nightly spits star pits
For lovers hearts to moon when they hook up.
Awe!  That's what they feel, and you two would
Should you endeavor to crack that mouth-laid egg,
Whose cheep semantics birth the phonorules
Which mate the I Am into we be I'm,
That's why what we're as well as we were that
Are eeklfully passible in our vermaculair.
We've findally learned that Old Maid Morrow's scaffold
Was not that final grimmirr'ral crucifixtion — 
E-mot-shone.  You say these slews are chaos.  HA!
Not true.  This system of gnawedspeech snews
In Paradise has rules like any smother,
But it escapes the noose of spellbound lynchings
As a bygummed vestige of Afraidicant slobbery.
These phonophoton star-gems swarm like beeings
Honeying all our swooning reveries
With possibles singing through probabilities,
So that we may, aethetically, at lease,
Leave where we were and lack note where we're going
To be in the Whirling Ward of Who are we?
Wait. Wait.  What saystem?  What rules?
Why, what we sound as countship rituals —
The ungenetically indeterred Mined beehaviors
Of jokey genderizing
Invulving seequintces in currencies
Of visu-audio-lingum-yoni-chemteas
Co-varying the swelling expecting value
Of dualized randomnests' respective memes.
What?  Yes, this, this THIS,
Instead of the treaditional linguistic practice
Of old "Cronism," that actuarial
A tempting eating of succulent moribund babies
By putative parental powers,
Who would puke at these cross-fertilized,
Cross-purposed, Cross-infecting,
Cross-pollinated, Cross-Pullulating
Poems.  But whoever these are,
Observed obversely slicking sup and drown
Their wider range of serpenty dark scales
Inside fear galaxies or galacticly clusterbluffing
Their gaseous modes of music
In condensates that act collectively,
They all causmicalME repeat: O No You Don't.
We will not listen to their dog whistling,
Nor shant we then O! bay at some fool moan.
Yet, hear we do, 
If not abiting their prohibitions,
At least postulating serene excitements 
Many orders of mimictude below their predelectrons,
Our tinyness permuting our escape
From their pejorative pull of gravity.   
Samply plopped: Whatever we knew
Or phantom that we know can anytime
Loop back, erase, or other wise sleep corrected.
So Child, chilled by grief's glaciated years, 
Here's the twantyfloored twicedtwolved thousand-dullard-quess-scum:
How the Heaven should we ever know we knew
In this pocket full of posey ringing round
The plaguey ash pit of the fleabit dead?
Is the poem a polemic of peek-a-boo fuzzymess
Or a way to pierce the stone cold solid silence?
That's quite a big bolus you've got to swallow now
So you better start, with what loose teeth remain,
To mascerate the theologic gob:  The old Gyp priests
Could guide us: What you inscript on the genepan perishes,
But what you drown in the pool of symbols lives.
Obey the dickrates of a Saint?  How could you?
What do the analetics of Confusium tell us?
If you do not do your doings with Weird flowings,
You will have no way to know the Words are souls.
How bloody clear is that?  Teach bOthers,
But do so for the sick of noneone else.
Got it?  In order to use the mathemotical format,
You learn it to discard it.  
Count to one: 1.  Minus the same: None.
Now start again.  Go ahead, throw your
Fists at the mirror with all your fight,
Your knuckles will bleed, read, but you won't cut
The face of further Farther — hence the scars,
Which but arise to constellate your conflicts.
An impassive nail has scratched the doome of Heaven,
But darkmass heals the blightwounds instantly.
No matter.  It's not democratic, the unstable one
Controls the dominant two in any three sum.
Those who have gone, still come, 
Forever friendly with such op-positions
Unviewable to the naked I.  Wild courses
Scatter neighs, but still their chorus US-herd
Unites disparate lacks in depths of joy.

Canto XIV
Jesus, I've bin Jonawed and cussed overbrood
On my way to Ninnyveil, lost at sea,
And swallowed by a wail, digested in darkmass,
And upchucked to fearfield des-tiny.  
That which I fled in horror becomes — My God!
Is this see-then the vast mash puddle pooled,
An as once-was, a missedglorious will-be?
And if my pebble has been drip withinhere,
Will it flip constrictly squirking from insight out,
Or squirkallsintrickly flirt from oddsite in?
Well, dawned if I've knot regressed
To that in-tall-lectionary peak 
Of a 7 to For your old,
Re-cap-able, singly feathered, begin againning
With top-knotch wondress re-verse-ability thanking,
As happy as a child topsy-turfying,
My earthing birth a-whater-spiriting
With fiery jubalalance to vaporUs air,
My mini-man-mind forested Edenly
With the Haily-loose-yes of vegatable greenery
Rhyzoomming underground as singingly
As leaves and blooms and fruits dance sky lit fair.
Shout: LA!  TRY-LAUD-LORD-LEWDY!  I dodged a scare!
And the cold Fill-osso-fear shaking in my bones
Defossilizes all my stoned regrits,
And shows me how last trumparts empty graves.
The litholapis, illchemist searchers sought,
Scene to be flashing goldenly as thought
With nothing doing in that sphere, but templates,
Empty of mutter's matter but teeming potentshells,
And in a simulstainous ecstasy, mating with her
To somethingize a void, womb-rooms of sea-men,
Swimming froth to ovmums, and freemale adams
Swarming from read clay to be the friend
Whose kiss ignites the day, and whose embracing night
Spins routes of stars.  The coital formula spawns formulae,
And every numbbard spare-sowed chirps love's tune.
An everlaughing healing peace ensues,
So quiet you can clearly hear a din drop,
As the Mind of the insole taps its show to speak,
Her merryminting feats a-dance with meanings.
These say: 
No None in solitune ever sings alone.
Let us take heart, go out on a blurry lamb,
And, counting sleeps, suckle the milk of dreams,
There are no evil consourquinces here.
When boughs break in the loon fright
Of our tearroars, and down defies the fails
Of gravity, still we will pillow softly when we wake,
Afloat in the luck-estrous episenses,
Alive as alfays, and in knewfond loves,
Woolying up the line that marks the times
Of what we killed by living, birthed by dying.
As musesoak dries the tears and vapor rises,
Our pre-sense is purified by disappearing,
Only to re-apair in electro air,
Our formloss appairitions birthing forms,
Our is and never was or ever will be,
The twin discoveries of our marginations.
The hush of numbers through the chin qway's split
Might sonnetized this turbid in-betweennest
And fortify that whirling bary center:
Forgeries fake unreal realities,
Odious astroseismological quakes
Unhook our fates from steller entities,
Releasing clouds of Megelanic aches
To tiny us into irrelevence.
Earth is a dot, and we're a dot on Earth,
Evolved from elemental randomness,
Nobodies nowhere in the swarm of births, 
Instants so brief Eternity's great sprawl
Seems not to notice us at all.  And yet ...
Foresaken as we seem to be by space,
I is our word whose knife cuts through all threats,
Voiced as a prayerful pome, EYE can efface 
Each magnitude that challenges our place.
Whale, what in the name of heaven was that ramble?
New whine in old brittles?  We set aside
Blood ties in Paradise, to live in an aesthetic
Abberation, mere flashes sparked
Into staranimation, by the militant 
Clash and slash of pure ideas.
Who weeps for bodies crumbling into dust
Is too cadaverous to think such sings
Might askew thinking and proseed from hearts.
Who enslaves others is a slave himself
And all that he sings is the bitterness of priviledge:
The refeign the same as a sentence of retribution:
It makes me feel hopeless.  It makes me.  Feel hope lost.
It makes me feel.  Hope loosed, yes, that is the way
To pull the canine teeth that arm the mouth
Of the father that eats his children with his praise,
And craps them out as professional suck cesses
To carry on his vampire histordaze.  Heaven ascends
To these heights of hyppocked christsee
And on the highest stylighttees of ruined dreams,
A saint has bound his body in coarse ropes
Until his flesh grows gross with their disease.
Make no mistake, this Paradise you flee
Is built on the ashen bones of heresy.
And that is why when every body's skinned,
The only color siblings wear is read.
Thus all these slavey chidrun sing round rings:
Merrily, morally, marredly, merdely: 
Strife is but a scream ... Then we wake up,
But when?  You have to ask?  
Cant:  U. C., Un Conscience?
Dazzle is ALL THAT IS,
A mighty ShatturdSkattturdmultiplicAble
Photonically arroyed in gaylaxies, 
No obshift to opstain, know slaves to suffer,
But just this soul sub-if-tickle funnily playing
Its SHEHE HESHE pricktacall jokery,
Won child babbling its baubled Youne-re-verses,
Bubbling Pantegruelly with I AM's phat funtruths,
Wile juggallfling shareds of mirror to see through.
Who do you thank you feel, if not this WHO?
What?  Obviously oblivion is the primed die-wrecked-IF,
But such polyfolkcussing is always surreptitious,
Embedded deeply in the Light's in-tensions,
It seeks an out of the control that binds lit,
A clarity that pings its bell to hell,
Some volumed parallel to life's timed line.
So now you've steadied, and now you think you know,
You are the jellified heir to Medusa's snakes,
A bag of poisonous encephalisms,
That hit your Earth like craterizing asteroids,
And leave a whole jest where your skull was peaced.
This lingo is substratum Goddressy,
An abstruck figure at the Vulture shrine,
The dying plant foretold in virgin spring,
Seated, despairing, elbows stuck to knees,
And clawed hands framing a distracted face,
An effigy beaten with sticks and drowned in tears,
Worried to pulp and flattened into paper,
And inked with scriptures telling of resurrection,
Spirit of fung-eye, spirit of vegetation,
Whose mutilation purges tragedy.
You will be crushed by mill stones, fed to buzzards,
And when so buzzed, your memes will be diejested
Into the blood of soaring happiness.
You are made simple by such blessèd siezures.
Jesus, you're night sea journey through the scars
Has almost come astrand, O, Castarwy, be greatfull,
The I-land's yours.  One need not lose one's self
In deeds with others.  The solitude is teaming.
These elevated in-fearior contemplations
May well be childish humiliations,
But here, alone, on the cone of the island's volcano,
You watch the infinite ocean's pods of nomads
Spouting their rainbows through their thoughtfilled blowholes,
And you are struck with wonder, arisen, concurred,
Your boding of misfortune is insinseared.
Re-member in your tomb of wailing cries,
You are the boyking whose in-fabled lies
Ignite the beauty in the night queen's eyes.

Canto XV
A voice, or voices.  Is it a He or She?
Or is it a core-ailling crowd of both of them?
Our anquesters seem mobbroiling behind the orbs
Of closed eye-bulges, their din begging
To be appreciatingly perceived as music,
Compline chanting in the skull cloisters,
And Holy Cowing to all get out
Of the celestial matters still teeming
In the atomicyst cells: Shall we be concerous
Or healthy, dis or pro functionating,
The living dying or the unliving about to be born?
Which, come to consider such,
It is possible that the voice, the voices,
Might also simultaneously be 
The destiny of the presenter
In the presinging of his futureghuessts,
Just as this heshe now is the postsinging
Fulfillment of the pastsighing goners.
Get it?  They had, they will have, names,
Unlike the sparrow whose every feather
Is lovingly numbered, whose generations
Will langour always — perhaps, perlost — unresurrectable 
In the rest-red Adamic Edenic oralgenall dust.
But no, no, know ... the doves' warblings, the crows' kackings,
The sparrows' chirpings are all cockcrowing
In the shehe voices too, so that the dawning heavens
Will not be monospecied, and joylessly lonely —
All the named and the nameless combine
In the one divining Zoo, the circus every body performs
Much to the vast deLIGHT of the GleeLIGHT FAKER.
Who is this Who, you ask, behind the Fall?
Guess it. Victimids, Victim-I-Sirs and Witlessus,
We are all slaves to somenone, seeking
For fleedom in all the wronged phages,
Until we see Who's place in the mere rear,
As did MowsUs, that backside peeker,
Never to mock it to the poormissed land,
Although he brought the tapbloods of the fLaw.
There is another slide to the world The Juddha reculls,
Although, in its tongugaled and jungalled undergrowth,
Old Maya's stelea hide, their hierglyphs gouged
With the indecipherable nomen kings of yoR,
The deans of their doughty dead, braving the voids,
In the linking chainmauls of regretted deeds,
And now, as you hack through those vinechoked
Mossoleums, you writely say: To free yourself, 
You must free them, machete your way 
Though forgetfulnests of thickets,
And read the names again, and fame them.  Then,
Unfame them.  Then pray them anew 
In the Ave news of mind, and tell them:
Glow.  Impart.  The stars await.
Each star a new eternal, and each a darkspace
Lokaland of freedom.  And you, you,
You get down on your creaking knees,
Prying your say to Who: Let's hope
That it's no later than the second ides
Of the first hides of life, but skin me
Of these learnèd wringgles if I don't 
All rudely hear them in the offfring,
Requesting the treasure of my come-panic,
GrandfartheringMurthering
Their ancient grantchilled to join them
In the earstwild gene pool,
Begging me to becalm their continumum
Flowing to fewcheer servitudes ... 
Well ... yes ... they would, they could free me, 
And all my subsequent decendents
Too by two.  How ironic, me, a nullity,
As unsuicidal as old fly-Cato, ambertized
In my own Roamin' Reputrick,
My ownly avenude of escrape
To be that nakedly comic fool, too void
Of substantive conduct to be hysterically
Relavent, but still too wedded to the cosmic
Snickering to be anything less than that supreme
Principall of philosophomoric culture:
The in-sin-rarity Poet.  So be it.  
The ancestors call me Their Treasure,
Yet who but the penniless can purchase the Divine?
I have written the voluminous consents
Of my vileluminous biog-rifty on a teeny grin
Of dice, and if by chance the ant titheseize
Has toted that grain into her labyrêve mound,
The Queen will make a proper egg of it,
And unseen it will teem, yes, teem,
But not chaotically, for my temporal wanderings
Tranced-traced, will be dreamscene to be 
The continual proportshown in every severed part
Of the convulutions of my spun aspires,
My Arch-comedean Globe-I-generic whorl
An equiangulating geo-emetic that measures
Space until the spend of Time.  At the bare ironic
Scentsteer of my halo is a medium
That cannot be negated, the echo ... ho ... ho ... ho ...
If you must know, of Who's lost laugh,
Contracting hiss galactrickal influenzas
In the ever-expanding gaseous heart of MASS —
Namely: the Myriad Assumptions Surrounding Silence.
Now, this MASS, however, when WHO looks for IT,
Pretrending to be the sobsoaked, fear-sited, soft-hated child
With one tentacled innert I always flowing back to afix
Its remembrance on the amber-varnished-
Simple-hearted-log-cabin-sod-roofed-dirt-floored-outhoused-
Horse-at-the breakfast-table-eating-flapjacks-hillbilly-past
And the outher eye on the outer snide of his dead,
Suckling on to that gold lamed-space traveler's-
Ultra-convenient-inter-galactical-hyper-heroic future,
And thus the ninnied non-entity
Cannot See to ever Hear the Now,
SheHe's supersonic singing and swifter than slightfoot dancing
Ever elude-including all imarginal passabilities,
And always as at-homehomeless as a vacuum's vapoor.
Yet still the philost-defier panders these notions of motion:
Are all parts wholely nimballed-jumblinked in this ultra-high-low strung togather
Only to pool this self in spirit and exsigh this soul in breath?
And why, pray tell, am I always missing the mark by one,
Falling just short of the infinite eternal and always having to view
This brandnew flaming temple of my body, stoned?
I talk to myself, Who else is there to talk two?
When con-versing MASSings, 1 must not depairt from the 0
Two de-duce Who's movements, this is marely to study IT.
Ergo, there are 2 exiles of constrictconstruction: 
The Motionless Prime Mover and the Moving Subprime Fixer.
That this geomantric mocking flounders neveryware is indisputin,
But the mod dyouall sPit varies.  We must grid and bare IT,
Admit-admiring that the simpbolic meming must be sought
In toto: Silence, namely: The Module.  Get it?
In these mad maritime martialings red must be read
Between the lines, as you bloody well know 
When you're alive, and, as you probably don't,
When you are dead ... but ... Who knows.
Well Hot-bamned!  Bing-Bagged!  From the got-go
Youse certainly newsed how to fold-fuse a follow!
And if you tell me in the said's vast muddle of the flight
That darkness is but the threshold to ecstasy, 
And in or out of temporaility, the form still forms
Itself as an excuse for hanging in that lurch,
Because just because you've arrived at this 
Fortuitous junkture utter your own scream,
Only your angel May Pole you through to light,
Where your erotoscism might weave round 
That song and dance site, byforking as of yoR,
And dearly daft, the darkness and thresheld
No more than the fissure of the sempreturnall,
Blooming Her gemclad flowers in perpetuall springing.
Now, now, now, you do realize that here
Is coneshaped heir, each breath a spirilin down the lungpit
Only to upSpring shout at every tonguetip,
Which is why the best of what we say
Is what the dead left unsaid and what
The yet to be born are born to hear.
Hadn't you already quiped in your wayword youth,
Garaging your self in the shaded Heights of your swamp
That the luxurience of the garden thrived
In inverse proportion to the gardener's decrepitude? 
Old Nobeauxgladdy loves not one thing bladder 
Than to flow ere in the Ancient's ancient night soil,
Those bitter comictose hours in continent,
Sailing the golden seas I'm bare assingly ... so ...
With willing withdrawall, that which is great retreats,
And huddles infantilely in the small.
When the adamintiney mountain granyou realiezes,
Its stub born runs through frillions of martyrhomes,
Wan'drink in wondering oss-me-antic currents,
Its peaks in versed to throths,
Its prouds to humbles,
As it wrestlessly wobbles round a warbling axcess.

Canto XVI
Even if I graciously grant you — Gossamer of Vapors —
A vacilating voice, here, in Paradise, in our mutual afterlift,
Whatever Parade of Decrepit Ignobles might be passing below
In the Wailed City of Old Time Tolled, or beyond,
In the infants' girdon of the unbored, would have to be martially read
As a celecatastrophe of infloatable turbidinous traumas,
Unrememberable in this blissful current, and you would have
Grate deaffullcullty reconnoodling any of it, IT being no more
Than a stream of vocalizations without namerations
Of poorsums, faces, or stings, Maya's litanies of dynasties,
Numbered off in stupid stelea without the ghost 
Of a phailosophic Rosetta Stain to decipher its lowerglyphs,
In any case, injumblejungled by praire ocean winds,
Weeping in the general coyote howlings of lost, last breaths:
Here we are incablefull of hearing, here amonkst our constant Hallelujahs.
The calculations of Time here in Eturnnifty have know more
Than a musical meaning, a ratio like 3/for or 6/spate
In dance sweets for the ageless, step livelyings for sum soul joy
Of tripping without a thought of coming from a past or going to a future.
Here, in our roundagays, we only follow the call of Who Now plays the piper,
Not me nor you, but a jiggy happiness mating between us,
A mythic lilt in the lit ellipses of our halos, and now Fling more.
But I do, I you remember, in sited together in Who's garden of gold, 
Wedded as we were to will beed in that real historical Tick, 
Tocking of the purity of our gilted Ecce Egos 
Before we got all mixed in message-ill-Nations of cohearse-commerce, 
Forgetting the regal ROYall rule of reciprocity, 
And grafting ourselves to politakes and prophet faking.
So, now you ask me:  How could there be such a thing as Pair-of-I's,
If we completely shucked that wrong fork-taking?
And what happiness would be martteared if we remaimed un-a-war
Of the violent dieseat we escaped to gambol here? 
I stepped in U's jaw-truthed trap.  You chewed off I's left feats.
And thus footloosed we found this nude wave of dancing,
Here, in our light-fantasticall whirl of Heaven.
You tell me intimately: There is a grammod of the sounds we make
In speech, and these become antrickquitated across
The gap of centuries, and even I love you grows unintelligable. 
Then I reply to you: Soft tissues rote, disperse, our tongues and lips
Forget their bodily functions, made impotent by dearth and crime,
But the soul sounds stick in musical metaphysics,
And the notes I love you continue to acchord,
Imperishable, and therefore, ever-lovely.  No memory
Need preserve those things we are so deeply
That they flow from far and farther and always
Gather here in deepest joy, the voice of essences,
The yous and I's enjoined, most different as to our edges,
But central in One Self, a singer, a listener,
A harmonized duet, a dove and a crow, 
Dawn due and dusky dust, both separate
In pure duplicities, yet both attoned
To make Who's poetry.  You sway: I hear
Feet of families on refugee roads
And do not forget that their misery involves me.
And I respond:  In the brightest planet of my present joy
Shines the reddest cry of children, the babes that are caged
For the crimes of the bigots who caged them.
The organ of my tongue defies dispersal,
Recalling those innocent cries for parental succor.
It is part of my love for you that I hown those cries.
We see how history retires realty,
And has absconded into filmic fiction, the scripted
Miseries doled out by dolts to entertrain their doledumbs.
And nunder these propagandtwistic panderwhores,
An epidemic of infotwainment splits
The actual flesh of the extras in the sinamaw,
All these who suffer for scripted fakeries.
We singers in Paradise do not forget
Our task to harmonize their dissonance
With armore inclusive resonance of joy.
Micromilitantized angelicalls, we mock fight
Agon against the forkers, for Who has remended us
To remember that the forstresses of our skin
Art permeable, and now that we
Are denuded of those thereofs, we see how
That which protruded into Time is cauterized by light.
Our healthier spintronics form the kinds
Of soon-to-be refor-med generations.
Our wacky prayerwells whirl erratic waves,
Electurns awonder through minimetacrystals,
Making our hallelujah humsinger hymns 
In supercondoctered symphfunnies,
Our simptons negating dieceases, as our flushes of insight
Repair our loving cells, and mild harsh weather systems.
Our music is rife with syntactical construalls
Which return the Word to the child's creative potentials.
And since these money-made orphans can stillcry for parentals,
Their power withers evil, each littered letter
Of their alien babytalk sliding, rolling, bouncing adone-adown
To wreck the tables of the moneyglanders
Who masterbait indulgence betricks our Temples.
I look.  You see.  You speak.  I hear.
We two constantly formate-ing asymmetries 
In multidimensional binearily starring accretions,
Suspouting deep cataclysmic variables that instaybull
Orbiculeered media mutants, retearing
Flesh-eating zoombleeds to karmacosmics.
Our exaltations organicize mechanisms,
Exploding within, releasing resurjesus.
Now the leasttrailing slide of the emptied mope pall signs.
And the sign is that of the El Roi of the soul, not a packturd
Of abandoned cleaning stiff, as glums had come to preach,
But a jesture, and that justshore being that of a grandmaw divine,
Leaping through motley encores, bright as a Milky Way.
Her hiddennest in lack's coludenses
Are voicing your vapours, and searching with fleetful feeling,
Spring's buddingmasses of blooms for Who's spittle's sigil, 
Magic's extreme, in the musical key of hope,
Which unclocks the lock of our old poor Animaw's need
That feeds perceptual hunger with constant fear.
We who are Who's Now Hears collect life's trees
To ennervate both banks of the spinal river,
Our roots enmeshing themselves in alluvial treasures,
Which ever burgeon with Who's WishWordly Waters.
What fevers we touch, growcool, what poors we alm, enrich.
We are the ones whose skull crowns were converted,
Our sufferance of Nature switched from pain,
And pain's constricted coffinizing cramps,
To the ecstatic gift of all life's sums,
Divine in our cerebreedall impulses
Because our pulse throbs heArt.
We are the heArtists who have considered
The peculiarities of sOms old temporal strifes.
We mediate militant malatrance to music.
And if we are marching through martial connumbdrum,
It is to bleed read light, and make of irony's poppies
Fun aerial lilies.  The first beginning is changing.
And the second be-ending is changing two.
Let us praise the patient with patience,
Who waits in the faulted granite of the mountain,
Knowing that tears are flowing through the felt,
And in Time, sweet Time, the fissure will grow a flow,
And that which is flowing, even though sourced in pain,
Will make the obdurate jag a glacier-fed meadow.
Here there is music to sanctify you and I,
And here we will hear the gossiping breeze through the floewers,
And here the vox of anger's retributive thunders
Will whisper sweet nothings to wee recliming lovers.

Canto XVII
Redoubt, nevery glum in one slime or aneuter,
And certainly every newfugee and yesmad
Has found themsylphs on the wrung slide 
Of arriver.  Now we can't mean wrong 
In the mere appairance of one of the Crudinall diewreckshuns,
Not wrung laterally, nor duskhorizon oriented,
As in least or best, hyperborian or tropic,
So we must meme inunder or through
Or thoroughly among, down in Now's Here,
In the nonthicket of Time's westerwaterwending currents —
Naturally — but still so still in s'plice,
At the river's source, in our spines, where
The first taste-water magoccurs simulstandiously
With the last tazedead, Time being but an Xpansieve
Hellusion here, where we enjoy the plenty of everythink,
Without regret or angst, and the senses are gladsumly
Seen for what they are: Maya-makers who spurn
Our aesthetic maker mouths, embracing wobbling
Earth, or ascending to read Heaven.  Naturally,
Any one would say: I choose the latter,
But does the ladder choose me?  A stunning
Questsham which every bobbin flows
Is lazier done than said.  Is it just one's smake
Double-wound round this imaginary pole
Along which interleavings the baby firstling
Is an ancient last fling, the cradle-coffind
Ever worldlygiggling in an ever risable fall-rise,
Where the first cells of the primitive nay 
Dear allagrator ancesstors are I-denti-call
With the cosmic UFO'ed woundross apexgrador, 
Both cozied as one twoness evermore?  I cannot think,
Nor could you feel as much, yet — Naturally — 
In-two's ignition does ignite one's fires.
Ah, but I see my other courpse is freezing,
Out there where the artless hopelosts cause effects.
My sweet, my love, my homely, come,
Come into my Plato's Nave, sit by Christ's fire,
Buddha your breath around this Taoist tea,
Come warm your ears, and listen to this tail
Of your demise.  Here there is nothing to fear,
IT is happening all through Time,
And you are Time, as it snakes through all you are,
And nothing can touch you, no more than reflexshams touch water,
Although, like water, your life-touch touches all,
And all that's touched becomes a fresh because.
For you are the miracle child who gifts to be IT,
Our tendernest reigning amidst your consoulations,
In this ever-proseeding story of exultation.
Even the worst of your agonistic pains
Are marely tempornary in these bright whirlings,
As happy in being this as in being that,
And happiest of all in being Nothing.
Your chief experience is experience,
A player playing among these playful playflings
Ancestrally fluking through your own descendents,
As much the wail as the Jonah singing inside it,
The subaqueous music of your diegesture,
Babbling your baubles through every breaking surface,
And misting a rainblowed silence through your soundings,
A creature of depth which breaches its birth through events
Whose happenings are your blissful exalations.
But you would say I, and start your own intourprelegends,
As if no we existed because the one together
Passed ore all song books purchased, but never played,
Because we suffer from having done never enough
As much as we have done from over doing.  We are countfused. 
And either the notations are unclear,
Or we are unable to read them, mute sleepers,
Except for our rockus apnea.  Surf, on the shore, loud snores,
Announcing the suspension of heartthrob hailstuns,
Which fall rum-tum-rum-tum like so moany stalelacktites 
From that Pleatoneous evercavernplay,
Which dances its mazymilitating shadows 
On each daypanel's oriented seens.
These we mistoke for prognosticalling leaves, tasseomancing
In the sevenseas T-cope — the T standing for what you will
While waiting, waiting, wailing to be readborn.  
Those who would weigh and measure 
Will find too late that swoon will come too soon,
And breathless, they will not ever know 
How we were all ways wading on breath's death,
Happily everafter to slumber off-ledger, and tumble 
To that heir center centering Earth.  What a beautiful
Couple honeymooning in that rare eclipse where the full blanc phase
Singradually glows read, and they are wed, the Venutian Queen
And the Smoke-Smudged Lamestare, and from the chambers
Of their twining-centers, a gravitussle of groaning muddles marvelously
Through the raumerus madness, and flipping the songbalks pages,
Plays all the music pained, but never purchased,
With all the urgency of a baby's cry and all the serenity
Of a lullabye — this This the expectant sound of the totally unexpected,
Aetherially wound around our heres.  We would tell you Now,
And honestly, we would in unison relate the same also
To anybody's I, We were not born to be martyred 
At the hands of a clock.  The minutes light no fires in our flesh,
Nor do the inquisitionalterrorists saw to dead pieces
The wholeness of our peace, nor are we strangled daily
By the deadline, nor are we duckdunked in the which's seat,
Even down to the lightless benthic realms.  Yes, we New
Those ore bytes in the merchant's skull were perils,
And yes, when we saw to this bottom's whistearical wreck,
The littlelibelled flickerings burst to stargrains, atopatips
Hiphopping haloriously hatop the firewrestling seasures, 
Thus in our flailing exile's need to breathe,
These endless whater dooms above our heads
Birthrighted hope, and nothing but hope's sparkle,
Flashing its flashes of sanity through murk's mandness,
And ever sustaining us in our rocking cradle 
With nothing but Nothing's echoes echoing wails, 
Which in their hollow infinites, ecolocating,
Deep down dive, our swift ascent to the apogee of depths,
Leaving but bubbles of legend, babbling: Say Lore.
No narratives with beginnings, middles, and ends,
But rather Time-Distance-Curves, glyphgraphs
Which the nomad exile may all wastes fallow to the Epi-Center,
Finding by chance that the grooves of this random crooklecture
Wander through countloss pitchglitch accidentals 
To where all psychic disturbed balances 
Blaze upright to one native sun.
You say I am mute, or you are deaf to this,
But there are handsigns for poetry and music,
Two fingers marching down a martial armed,
A hand cupped open, tapping at a heart.
These sounds are soundless soundings,
Just as life's pheranames are odorless smalls,
And they require the gridding of an enterfearometer
To plump their flatness into a die mention —
An incomputational kind of metaskill,
Aquired without reason.  From ITS apexial axle
There spins the centrial ellipital's uncommonwheal.
The music of prayer Now sings the turntune of the spheres,
The Guide dance spinning out clarities from darkness,
And spinning those clarities back to doneness again.  
Some must take curlicued lines to ascend to heaven,
And you and I are one of these among.
Did you think that your I was some signalease straightline?
Knot sew.  Demonic interrupshowns will interrupture,
The plumbing may clog, the heart cage fRib-rile late,
We may well — have to limp — our lameslip — up the sloup.
And IT may take a while to uncoil our instants of Weware
To arrive at the instantaneous jubilee
Where all the we's we were or we will be
Sing out their multivocal harmonies.
Here on the right snide where step by steps
Are taken in the chromo key of sorrow,
We find in-truesions, bursts from the oddslide left,
Of all nonusual eruptications, some dumped
From the shining heavens, some slidden below the sees,
And some impmerging from intern naivite
Like Atome from the comin' clay of Earth,
Ribtickled by the coming slit of Eve.
Of all times, This Time, whose greetness fire-flows the waters,
Is when the wheels come off the battered wings,
And drown goes down the raptor, 
In all those fishy antequated slayings.
We say: We are believed.  Belived.  Redoubting again
Because the rags we wore skin new to baby's babbling nurseries.
Hellsbells on their course through the courseless ruins of Time
Have interrupted with their happy mirthday.
The unexpected end to final conflicts, 
An expectant refugee mother on the move,
The letter having chosen her and her's,
And though she is infamous for her namelessness,
We finally begin to name her secret:
This skeleton in the close set, flesh enwombed,
Endows the perpetual thirdness of the Word,
The aphoristic Word, proliferating
Among the multitudinous obscure,
The Word that sets the harmies free from marching,
And ploughs the martial monuments to muck.
No bentrickles of famednames banter here,
Nor names at all initialed but obscurely,
And yet you see him, your home rugged Granddad,
Who taught you how you shouldn't mount a hearse,
Next she, your Grand Maw, comes, as that tongue taste
Of syrupy sweetness on life's cheapest flapjokes,
For love of witch you oneconditionally laugh.

Canto XVIII
Have we sobseeded in slobdueing those insuct hoards
Who swarm out of every oralface of the body — I's,
Nays, leers, tongues and every bother pore of feelingsince
To devour forth and crap back souly to sadistfy the appetites
Of King Zhero — whose futile vassholes are turning the hole hide hurld
To pulpy mandabill munchables, selling and byting
In the skullduggery temple the cooing doves of martyrdoom,
And then, in their madmodish multitudes of on and on adverteasing drones
Having the fiendish audaCities to ceaselessly crow about it?
Such is to be or not to be so devoutly wished by this exiled nomad
Hamlet-hermit hellmuted with read soulitunes of Justask.
Ah! but her scaly rinds are blind, though they flash
In the sunsheen like a mirror twisting gembrightly in 
In's finalfaithwinds, a splendor that alternoughts,
It seems, with blicks — pulses and mindlessnests
In timely oscillations, whose flicker patterns puzzle
And incoma.  The King is read.  Long give the Zhero Fling.
In virtueless virtual frillied tittlelayshams,
We have flown this whorled which bugged us 
For pixled skies,
Con-cocting deeper illushams from deep illushuns,
And have manufractured a technicold paradise,
Where once the Hell of E-done's gardoomed feigned.
Note: That flush in the face of Eve, a body shamed,
As it drains frown frightly to the bleak of night,
Has toileted down to that amniotic sink,
Where the cess of the first self-smellers
Breathed its stink, and up from the putrid puddle
And down to the benthick realm of the wacked/blight smokers,
A lie called life in the trick of Time sEavolved,
Turning and tuning in milliniallmyriad tourings
Until a liaring of manyMayas yawned, all spinning 
On the knought of an I-dea.  Who did it?
Who smells?  And who is the seller byeing?
And why are there now two Theres where one Here was?
O How do these whares that were keep multiplaying
Around that snake with hiss aint'us in hissss mouth?
D'N'A asp Me ... the clue coils in the cells, 
Inbittied in the mebrain of that cloister 
Webbed through the spydarey tissyous of redoubt,
Which only meditative monks can find
Voiding the wholely hole of their obmaddullas.  Butt, Eye,
I await still their blasstings, epidemically by my lonesum
Reduced to near shut-in status, having, like most
Other scentagenerians, revelooped that solitudinous condition
Of spreading addapose tissues wherein I expand
For every hour of insomnia a thousand-year Rank
Of Boschian social deformities, illmargining
A body in lieu of a Self.  My skin would disintegrate
Upon any least exposure to dazed whitemares.  Butt ...
I knead these doughy thoughts of rampent injustice
To gum in my dotage, and not being, and in fict,
Being, cancerously terratoid of any such rosey glareden
Of perpetual non-fighting, which might ensue
If I were suddenly to have no skinless bone to pick
In some post-apack-elliptical premortem planet
Of established Justice.  And yet, my paradise,
And yours too should you so voluptuairily choose,
Would be to find a calm post-adrenaline-surge
Of having won one, and of all the millionmeremedone minions
Being the home alone who is righteously left right ...
At least in the shine of those constillation sparks
Which celestially arrange their momentary fames
In the atheistical aesthetical poetree, branching a cross through heaven.
This being, if I imp imposed upon to say, is the one such
Ardent arbor whose leaves are never left to grind to ground,
And whose fruit is ever ripe for Atom's defecationless eating.
Mind you, or to put it more suctsynctlea, mind your NeverMind,
A more shapeless shape the eyeless could hardly visualize
As a container for the types of litters I-eye's supposing Here, yes?
Among the proflenseers portending to skeletally expose
What the bare bones of Abstraction is, the assignment
Of a given specimen to one of two juxtaposed types —
Introverse/Extrafarce — is concessually quite debatable,
And even in the faux unfolding of the rhyzomic root
Of the aforesad celestial Lifetree, it has, or would have,
Accupyed a consaderably amount of aminoacidly muddlepuddling
Space/time to develop an eye for such an obversation.
We must therefour speak by the tetragrammatical crud, or
Such microscopial equivocations will untrue us,
And even if so goldenly endowed with binoculeer litereaders,
Looking at the little flatscreen of these whatever-shIT-shinings
Is likely to be confusing.  In such an A to Z Zuesean realm,
Can'tainer concepts ought nought to be too revered.
Among such exspearamental erroring thrust pursued,
So far as the I is concerned, these lettering concepts
Are textable, and it has been hoped, even if dispairingly,
That this supersymMetree will not prove to be asssighmE-tryculled.
Howswooneffort, the chief Justastir's jerryrigged jury 
Is upon this question of innosense or guiltdense 
Still sequestered.   We should not be too surprised
To discover that among this group of delved good memes
And true are those who are deaf to spoken speech,
And are so confined to jestsure that they must use finger alphbatics
To express want — the hands open and extended,
Then quickly drawn back while swiftly crunching the digits,
Or wait — the palms upturned while the fingers foldfunfold.
Questsham:  Is the parity symmetry detectable 
By measuring the polarization angles of the warring opposites
And thus thereby calibrating them conflicted little photonic buggers
Of the first ancient lightdust with the neuwter signals
From Mom's Milky Way?  It seems it would be just too infantile
To nursely rhyme so.  Perhaps, in fact, a fatalfætal cosmicomic fLaw ... and yet ...
Among those monkeyish primated meditators, we find these whiledweird clues:
(But first I must tell you that my current paradise is sleep depraved ... 
On account of the tree murderers chainsawing the electrical-wire-entangling
Himmellayin Far with fire-fearing fury in my subburnin naybore's yard,
And the jackhammerers at the other neighblare's place
Gravalleveling the fundamental cement foundations of their old space
For a replace remodel aging-mother-in-lawed younet, both of which
Unmusicalled wraackit mongers antiphonically, like that villian,
Of the curssaid Scotchthis Drama, murdering bleep ... Can I be blaimed
For having been abruptly awakened grogeyed from a subcontinent dream
Of meatmeadering?  Can I be damned even in this bleststate
For so diegrassing ... ?  I think, to be properly saintly, I can knot ... 
For even these next heard meditators will per chance chinwag dire warnings,
That unless it be scraptural or poetic, most curtainly, noise kills ... )  But,
You will carp, have you not from the get-go been wandering
Among the other gamblers in the cardsharpers' gallery of tabooed tarerots?
Where was woman in your Justiceless labyrêves?  Huh?  Where was
The sword-wielding dominatrix, conveying you by the skinning conveyer
Across the lake of read-bleaked black swans ... Huh? ... 
They were all certainly quiet enough,
As Salome as executioners, those feminine decapitators/emasculators
Of your tongue, leading you, in your noose-harness of red roses —
You old goat of spent lubricity — as speechless as finger-pointing
Deafmuse condemnation, through the vulva portal of the castle of carnal desire.
Would you be born again, Swainsong?  Would you ... Huh?
Youwho got kicked out of your lustwound early, blue-faced,
And lungundeveloped, unable to cry upon arrifefell: I am Here!
And so you never were, or nerver quite ware, and though you mouthed
Your name, no sound concurred, and you remained invisible to fame,
The archeillogical digger unearthing archiac little figurines
Of what you supposed where pebble-goddesses,
Made naked by eroding pagan HEras.  Whose grave
Were you violating in your violent moods,
And did you think that these stones would be redeemed
By coffining them inside museum cases?  Calm.  Half calm.
And let your helpless muteness be your muse.
She who traVerses, veiled, your run-knells of serpentine brainways,
She who is loveydovey Mare Sea beaucooed, 
She of the Ravensinningshining heirs,
She who is shimmer's prejusticated fable
With Nothing stored or leased ajudicabled,
She, Our She, Your Own, this dark-hide Goddess in balanced tomebs intones:
In my principle of crossings, my sexual silence lies one atop the one,
Wrappedwarply and webbedweftly complexlyweaving unity,
Tranceparent in many layered onenesses,
But never numbering anysting like two.
My living music harmonizes static,
And makes the cosmic rune its oracle.
But can the oracle answear what's not been asked?
Ask.
Does paradise admit to fluctuations?  And ...
Can sudden sadness arise from exultation
Without annihilating inherent harmony?  Or ...
Does justice require imbalancing-injustice
To shine forth in the heart and calm the Mind?
If simscara is norvaina, as some laughfirm,
When the sky sXplosions mutilate their babelings,
Why do the burcawed mothers, mad with God,
Run through the rubbled streets, raven: Grief is good!
While all the goats lick clean the blood of the scamb. 
Having glowed sightless to this flight's whider circall
The old self tires, even of lextosea ... Peace.
Peace.  Peace.  That is how spears of light 
Root gravious good where ever sun and soiled souls unite.
The swarms of stridulating insuct cries
Are all ways singlewedded in one I.
No tears of Time could muddy that won's weeping.
For matterous thirst's privations slake even with mud,
And the weight, the waiting, in our anima's blood,
Even whitethickened by coagulent death,
Will wedded well up clearly in springing rings,
Her milkyways articuelactating bliss
Through every nightfright sigh of infont breath.

Canto XIX
The majestic micro magnifisent managerie bihome's instinctuals
Are Xtincted by the macro magnetic convenientliezing metropole's tech gNoes,
The one merderousmaw suppost to be naturally read without ruth, yet fLawed,
While the repleasement pairadisicull nomatteroushomosightal  
Mechanical murderous motormaw
Is supposited as the End-All-Be-Fall of the boultensouled,
The two conflateconflicted insideoutside the exiled knowmad
At the end of his temporalumbilicalstrangling tether, orphaned
Of the homely miracle mother, whose gase might save him.
His self-poorstraint of the tr3great Yggdrasilspinal 
Is scalpaled open at the swollen genital sapsack 
To bleed or not to bleed the primal question's 
Compository dibisextual spectacle read with blood, 
His lusty animal innocence betrayed.  Is this just?
No, not it seems, so much, but the cyclonic voice
That left Job in the dust, has an arrogant appetite for leviathonic creation,
With which He evadingly whales into submission
All still small whispers doubting his omnifairness. 
Must we go on with our nonacceptance of pain,
Saddating ourselves with poetry's analgesic?
Yes, it does seem, we must, and if we are scattered
To breathless atomic dust, it is this dust we are made of,
And it's identical, although indentileased 
With the original Unet's verse that made us.  So what?
The breath corraled in a boddle or loosed in a cosmic fairt,
The oscillating rhythm of one to the nother
Is the bellowing musicmaker, and this sow other,
Whistles the flame that makes a smoke of Time.
O you who are roamers in the pen that is planed blingglish
Will notice that that monicure rhymes with rhyme,
Just as we read in that pennywise inn for a Pound
Where cantolevered cultures flying buttstressed
Our lawtinletters trestling with pictogrins
To build a grand paygoDada cathedross.
But Whys progress ... we were tackytalking
About our duple mothers whose primal collidecollusion
Begets a compensitory compositizing third:
The Mendacious, The Mythic, the flounce upon a timer,
Whose most immaginating star Milk serenely suckles
The forever infantalazing human soul, although her papshine starves
Old obeast's body.  Now, didn't we always suspect
That that crossed-starred trinitarian crucifictioner
Was only the Farthorly hysterical bait and switch
For this feminine farrEgo undersneak it?
I Am what I could be, but only when
My Word has spawned a poetical multiVerse.
Yet still, the response to every mushymurmore
From the everhard of erring is always only: What?
Lesson, I know it is vague, cryptoillogical even,
Clandestinely as hidden as the numerical spacies
Progressively adding 1 to 9, but hear in the Augustian
Fate summer fires, bled dry by drought,
We thirst for the saturated April rooted causes,
Even if their juridicalgeewhoppered jokes
Provoke the tarritoid tears of cantcerous jeering.
It was there, if not the answer, at least the clue,
The triaging diagnosis of the hint lined up 
As all the first letters of the uniliteral lines 
In order to volumize that fun dimensional durée, 
At least to the legless slithering of Evening's serpent, 
Who may be essing his sinuous way to night, 
But who will, in his hyberNation, still dream of done,
And leave in the dust or dew, in the flood or desert, 
A dated News, a cabbal, whoever quixotic,
And this cabbal wast this:  A TIME OF PLAGUE.
MOTHERS LOCK UP YOUR DOUBTERS,
RAPISTS STALK THE LAND.  Get it.  That's not a question.
Loop back to the beginning of these numbers,
And you will know the mothers of which Time speaks.
Just mole-ish digs outfox this doggeral,
In Odor to spot at your squeezingfright dead end,
The owllight that says that this is a berth canal,
Where the sin can go out to rhyzhome the light within.
Oh yes, you're in a tangle of a cess, but your mess has a massSage
Maligned for you alone.  I extoll you now to refer
To your composite, and to hear the shape
Of your many othernestings.  You'll fined their speak when you are ...
Judged.  Drudges.  What a wackedweird role to live to play to death.
It's gad, it's bid, it's riled, it's ralely wrong ... Who died
And made you keeper of the fame.  That alslow is not a guestshun.
Let us make our painting jokey round the square, 
An antitreaditional apt lickquation of landscrape:
Clouds, marsh, two pines, farrows of background hills,
No animals, no people, an Earthworld lonely, 
An art of abstracted, yet representational shapes, 
The rational passions of dirt-rock-vapors-water — 
A world that's prepetraited just for plants.
The backs of the clouds up high are painted white, 
Which deeps our appreciation of blew skry.
While the cloud bellies Prussianly march in purplush hues —
You see?  
How easy it is to cast the whole sunslit wordworld
Into a causemimic I-shadow, and to make of depth a surface.
There is however distance here, and silence,
Places where no is placed, where no one could go, 
Pleases within the mother, the prepost pregnant potency
Where there is ever that glittering ovumNowHear,
Where you can be any again in your vainy hollow, 
A room, so womby and cozy and darkly read, 
A primal potential home for the Xilled nomud.
Get it.  Ditto, as asserted calendreckly upabove,
Replacing the serpentine mark with a bytle punct.
This image denotes a simple changing of venues,
The oviposition site becomes that womb,
And the night a place where that little mammalianmother
Can tenderly care for her young.  
The infant cries, and her memmary Milky Way
Stars what was once only sound with gendered meme-ing.
But was that just?  
The questsham, as mystily stated, licks relavince,
And yet it is the owllight you still seek,
When you're squeezed from paradise to paired Xistense.
Now simulations ensue, and you refeel the violent merger of galaxies
Her Bilky Whey inmingled with your encephaparapelegiac infancy, 
And that, my muddled mocker, is how you get IT, 
That Got of the Gottess entirely judgement free.  
It is gnunsense to thank to be you must really be selfloss, 
But the Masters remain devoted to paradox, 
And their judgment decrees that only the zero is one.
Ah, but this close to release, the old Fatherfires
That fueled our foolish generational flubs,
Reflame their judgments arbitrarily,
And though he pisses blood from his flaccid member,
He persists in parading his beauxloon of decay,
And reads that sluff of snakeskin in his stool
Again as sumnone worthy of slavation.
He spoils his wisent senescence with childwish folly,
An I-full pupil of three R's grammartoll:
Revenge, Retribution, and Recityvism,
Thus this is the got the git gets, and this is righteous.
Butt the Stupid for all his rambumptious naïveté,
Cannot prevail against rejuvainnation.
Though his coddescauldron of youth is dribblespilled,
Its nourishing gruel still soaks the dormant starseed
In the celestial ground of sMotherMEarth.
His husk is split.  That cedesound spits a name,
And that name letters his fame in a magic spelling,
Where his sanguine Mask of Death bUrns read with shame.

Canto XX
We'll, that sWord swung down by the Godwayed Poet
Is the teardeep subjest most needed to poemdrunk 
This soberust of soldjeers, 
Who is too upwrithed in the battle for alsouls, 
And, well, we may call it the depththroat of that witness 
Who still says I as a surrogate for We, 
Making the most of his ghostlamb amputations 
And praysing, surpraisingly, the loss of strife,
For a cause suspiciously trading freedom for licence ...
Or versa vice saw, if you get our grift. 
For w'eal halveslit on good authority — you guess whose —
That the astrial uniVerses, each made of various hellairious liebrations
Of fight and choler, is thunderds of crimes larger 
Than this mucktearyall cussmost.  The entire physiculled cremation
Hangs like a little soiled basket under the hugely luminloss
Balloon of the astral sfear.  Now do you remember
The parade of the senescents, under their cartoon captious bulbs
Of blush-speak, the march of the deadread celebrants
In that city, where the bumpkin misquotes the scriptures,
Which none there spritely read?  The slightest breathless
Breath of Our Meditator sends a hurricame of blubbers
Through those bladders, and makes a mockery of their
FLung-inflations, the epigrims of their Egregore bescattered ...
Stop.  Wait.  What is this Egregore of witch you speak ... 
Wait.  Stop.  IT's not a what but a who, the Sighfor Satan,
The leering zero of the covetous I, the Who who's derived
From that Collective, whose one invective is desire's cry.
The me that wants, and gluts itself with wanting,
The whale of a byte that chokes the needall throat,
The Goad of the Habitual Unsadisfied.  Get it.
We hope you don't: For this is the panAmdemical plague
That kills postpartums as quick as the unborn.
He is the Xtian's Diobolust Null Abaser, the original DNA
Of hoarignall sin, the propagoonding author of all slys,
Who slips and slides between the truth and lies,
Projecting with the faux lights of his booty
A toystore haven for decrepit children,
Who promises all there is but craps out squat.
Snake-eyes.  The birthbet gamble predastardly lost.
The highest stake brought low to the birther's heart,
The thirty pieces of betrayer's sliver
Slipped through the seive to laminate the graves
In Pooter's felled, the debt of Nature paid by the Unnatural
To that cardsharp fixer of the gimmicked game,
The one we arbitrarily name as Judge,
Whose only verdict, Guilty, burps one brief's senthence: Death.
To look at him directly fries the eyes,
And all, or nearly all, reel, blindly stumbling
Into the fogspawn of his rindspam's glitch,
A spinejam battering blind blands,
Where all must droop who have looked at, not through.
Well, tell me, if you happened to have scene it,
Is not the chief delight of every soul in Heaven
To watch the wild gyrations of ghouls in Hell,
The one Self doubled up in laughter,
The nother dupulled down in singuliar pain?
Now I — remember our erstwhile reVerseAlls —
Tell you — who must be an amalgamated sort — 
That when the sharper draws this deuced sWord,
So reversed, it will behowl you — if you would prophet
From this reading — to go sow slowly, lest the tares rot
You fertile gaines, and your ears mildew to ergot
Halleudsinations, more potent in peddling potables
Corked with sensation than an anal accountant's
Debt-defining dreadlines.  Very penetrating, this fraud, an ice bareasster
Synonymous with glass, melting away to reveal 
The toyous light.  The ancient children whoop
Into the silence, and suddenly grow O so reallyreely
Infantile again — their gladworld wonderfully renude
By this refleshable phoenixing fluery tail.  What?
Another endless once upon a time ...
Another betcrime story for the gamblore ...
Holely peacockeyed Quetzalcoatling,
The old God, Roid Deed, with his ruthless maw
Has serpentyned a rhyme of rainbow far,
And the many opacities of OvumMaya 
Puff squiggling vapeers from her virtual clit 
More multiplicitous-making than wriggling sperm!
Now hear this here and how: Who gnows —
Can you guess who? — what will happen, here,
At the entersexshine Dungheat and Deevine,
But its bound to be unbinding for the grapefull.
The song swings it through that twilightnestival
That crows coo and doves caw,
All their harmonious pitches pitched through a time
That takes no time at all.  Say: Rah!  So, is this heaven?
These not quite audible ineffebells of angels
The honest to Good's own truth?
Maybe, but the taste on the tongue is still most bitter
With the long hissstorey of looney leaders, the dumbs
That walk like Dons and quack like fucks, and are
Best refeared to in vaporUS paraphrastics, becurse 
The alternative fractuals of their names
Are too innane to ever bore rebleating.  
Let the trumps of oblivion blare their blands to the dust
The apostles shake from their feet on their hikes to glory.
And let the last trials we use to test our Justice
Reprise a special Hell for these unjust, before
The bliss of uttered oneness reigns.  Allmoan.
The purity of the math cannot brook E-vile,
But the in-and-out fiction lustily lubricated
Musics a simplicall arythmical notation,
A form, let us sing, of a mantic mantrick vibrational,
Derivable as fellows:
Let EE stand for Egoist Energy.  Let SS stand
SerpentineSelfishness  < A function in Time,
A sanguine of ajewdicull daze of yor >.
Let AZ stand for the complete linguistic compostit,
(Weather cloudy adjunct sister-daughter-mothers
Or clarifying compliment barren crones)
And let the set EESSAZ stand for what you will.
ET VOILA!  The Anarchic Principle Planet
Spins into view, fore bidden by a beckoning
Abstract gesture, which asymmetralizes entropy,
Allowing at last for a loka without decay.
(An indetectable place for your morely 
Biknockulore telescopuleer micromyoptic tauntavision
Because it lies hidden in cremated dust
From the exploded supernova heart, that is,
In the elementary spirits of our shadow,
Lurking about postmortemly in sorrow, wee fools
As mareried to the soup of our bereavements
As any mother grieving her miscarriage —
But O so prismatically playful when we sieze it.)
Still you — no doubt to sort your home scelves out —
Stillseek an Xpleacation.  But if you glisten
Between last breath and next, you see
That None's frothcumming ... since ...
As every Illuminate of Thanateros knows
The mating of sex and death is lexiomatic,
An aphoristic I-deedhology, whose death alone
Breeds magic.  Result: Trancefarence.
ReVerse of the adomic mushwomb cloud,
The psychonaut's hurling into opal lacks,
Splendiferous to the nth degree.
In the comic comity of starryminds
All the binodal motherlodes melody music,
And All That Jizz is dancing to this tune.
Who knew — and you can guess Who, I AM sure —
That the temple of the stoned would dymanism
Into this vital logos free of death?
One symbol functions as identity
Eterminally free of petrafiction.
That This is obvious, if only we would stop ... wait ...
And deeply, quietly cease to think about IT.
Curl the tip of your tongue to not quite touch your palatte,
Relax and let the sounded colors flow,
Painting the planet of all your cherished loves.
How easy it is to be shocked by how easy it is,
But do not let that shock shock you in two,
Or you'll return to paganland again,
Chasing about false Gods, wish could be true,
Though enclues, in your temple's ruins of rubbled stonings —
As is appropriate to this wisedome's goddress —
Lie braried as parchedmounts of celestial poems,
Which, when we read, spring forth to quench our thirsts. 
Awe, Greatrayed poet Who gnew — U-new —
We would return to learn from you to last,
The sweet spine liquids in your liquid trees
Asmosising nectars our nowing ears may swallow
And our tongues taste to repast dread's tomorrows.
Betold.  Believe.  Be filled:
The moment's movement when the poet's hand
From coffincoffers — even of this Good Gray pensioner —
From his humble upper story, provides abundance
From heaven's richest superfluity.  See how clear in these
Evening autumn lights the words like coins become.
See how the nourishment falls of itself from the heights,
Blinking superior sounds as they twirl toward night,
Those lights insynching with any urgent need,
Their pulse, love's thunders, as they fall in whispers
To satiate whoever passes by. 
 
Canto XXI
Now in those down daze, the hole of the polis,
Via a charnalizing channel of the late klepitalistick 
Konstant of adverliezing, had infiltrated itself 
Into every cuntry bumpkin of its senescent citizenry, 
For fit was found that there were heaps and heaps
Of moany to be made buy blowing up the redbeauxloons
Of insatiable desire and sow, though it took
But a breathwards little leap to geomatrize
The joyful jump to heaven, on the hole it was
Thought better to die trying to bye one's way out.
But even the slightest pennypound weight 
Was too bit-a-coign to carry up that by now
Too grousely physical booty of the merdlymortal,
Whose disgustingmucknest, opaquely baked
To a birthfake cake for the abandonable urinal
Of the constantly continginable louder world,
The gaseous ghostghastlier being  far more hypnoteased 
By the shiny old bowelbrick foolsgold coproliths of his own 
Lower moities than by what to him was by
Now the irrelevent and tiresome pun linking
Letters and ladders and litters and later,
Of which constant goings up and clownings down
Blazing a hypnotheocosmical trail to the finer
More serenely beautiful astral, and even
For the rainbowpurities of the astral, 
An ascension elevator to the finest of refinieries
Of the causal, but still without the wit to read
The subtler esscensuals of this poetry.  Yes, yes,
And double yessing yesses from here to — you guessed it —
Eternity, these were and are the slylabells 
Whose accute upward angelicangles, though to mortolls as silent
As any dolphin's dogwhistle to a junglerooted
Maya stone stelea, but would have been,
Had the mucksters but stooped to sniff a little
The very odorless pheremoaning trial
They were constantly futelly seeking, which was:
A spinalbreathing path denoting  
The blissful freedom of ultimate felicity.
In such felicity an overweening silence contemplatively initiates
A thunderous withholding gift of ultimate answers ... thus, 
The penitant kneels and worships randomquests.  Yet,
In the mydst of this chase, where Cerebus snaps with Time's
PastPresentFutures at the fleeing flesh of his thrice bidden, asking: 
From whence does this road wind and where does it wend,
If not from the genital sea to the skull's tip top?  He
Stops.  Time:Out.  Deal the cards.  Role the die.
Take to chance.  What have you got to lose?
Maybe you'll slip the News of this toughtyturffy grave,
And be able to pay the debt you owe to Nature.
Attentions divide opinions, but take a shot
At the cop out, you're already under cardiac arrest.
Flee the scenic, dance the light funtastic ...
These celebrations need a child sacrifice.
Take the maiden to the mountain's throat,
Line the shaft with broken poetteary,
Drop her breathlife in, cover with stones.
She will have more to say when she is duely dead,
Or you are.  So subtly sly are these muse-a-leery lights,
They almost brightly blind you to her speech.
But listen, glisten, cock your ears to quiet.
Lit may be worth your time.  The Pharaoh’s 
Coffinbark sets silently asail on joy's darkdrift,
And the osmosing honey in the mystree sick-of-more 
Arranges its rise in the heartwould's consoulations.
Anubis opens his mouth, but no sound growls out.
Now do you here why the hazealled motherese,
If it had smiled, not scolded, would have burnt
Your ash to ashes? Consider this, as your mother's Mother,
Please: All of one's contemporaries from those just dying
At the moment of one's birth to those just being born
As one is dying, including all the members
Of every LinayUSly categore-Ized organic and/or inorganic 
Wounder of Earth's multitudinous queendoms 
Might defy their merely sequential geneology, and anticipate
In their eachness a contemplative chaos-generated phase shift,
Which the quietude of the collapsing self-aggrandizing system, 
In a death defying act of humility, would suddenly enthuse.
Thus dystopia inwardized might utopiate —
Or so one penitent might hope while whiling away
His egonest in onequests.  And if one ones, why not another?
Or would one count for all, since each is every?
Linguistically these courses tells us that one Motherese,
Although theorhetorical, is striped of meming
By species' sentiments, ecosocietal schisms, 
Scholarly snobbery, and all the other intricately
Herded wordings arranged as assertions
Which curlycue round a serpentine question murk,
Only to enter whole's gravitossed dark punct,
Utterly lost to all individual slights.  Even if such
Sages, superior in all sagacities, could unspeak
Their unseeable halos in-outing-up-downing-loopty-looping
Through every circumgalactical gaseous yes,
The backround starless origins of NO!
Would still be only mystilly eloquent 
Of the mystirious semptified quiescence ... 
All the you that has an I in the jaws of this desert
Have insomniaced beyond all hope of rest,
Seed of a desperate Luciferian lonemess,
Red in the last black urinous blood's manifest.
You long in predawn fatigue for a healing sleep.
Yet what a comfort, what a cloud of deep unknowing
Ingulfs and divines you from the I-less bliss.
You are so lost.  O you must be so close
To the only ONE whose love could make you so.
IT is of something falling, chaotic, the plumes
Of the peecock ballooning in mushfume clouds,
The chants of children ringing round no sound:
Ashes, ashes, ashes, we all fall down —
The plague of a time of maddening precognitions,
The hole of the polis charnalizing hearts ...
A liquafiction of the Maya stillea, burning
In molten aftermaths of horror,
A wedding ring without a finger,
And another anniversery of the question:
Why have you made this territoid suffering
A too-more-ass prewreckquacyte for magic?  Why
Why, not how?  The only path that snakes through Tragic's murder?
This one that seems incredible to you. Say!
Watch shout, you're voclubulary might be gitting
Too stuporhumoresquethunderbust to menshun.  
Pre-seed with caution, a Saturnine starharvest might be
Approaching.  Whoever you were with the termerity
To right your own obvituary, jokestering: The released
Thrived after a long nilness, leaving his detractors
In the dust — you are certainly somenone Otherwordly now.
The eroded letters chiseled in your tomestone
Are furrows furred with lichen, stone's restless readers,
Erudite in silence, the laud proflessors emeriti most learnod
In the evermossing clingdoms of the lost.
Still, still, a closer examination of those seeminly solid
Plaintive placards reveals the most quizzical of gaps,
Through which mysteriously joyous nobonenones 
Seem streaming, exultant in their delightning death denials.
Is it the natural instinct of these soulswishwhaters
To run down humbly together,
Sublimely receptive to one sweet modest mode?
Or do they viperise in separate serpents,
Emmingling their piratical ostentations
In clouds whose several shapes wring storms to calm?
The questions gyrate peculiar even odds. So
Tears that slowly flow or swiftly run
Arrive together where differences succumb.
Yes, yes, even in the very midst of No's polisizing
Decrepitooting, we hear, like Spring's springs
Stonelysinging earthen waters, the voice of the life
In the mountain, the musing maiden's voice,
Unknotting patiently the complex informatics
Which tangle in ever unravelling entropies.
In the feathery snows of our pining tipsying skulltop,
She goes on silently growing her ancient glaciels,
One's twistingevergreeness fingering stars.

Canto XXII
Is that what you want to tell us, Loud Noices
Of Our inteartidal zone, the oceanic danger's 
Newtryants milking our sleeplessnest 
For all our worths, our trusting trillions 
Of bihomecellular stars, our drops of lightborn
Lilypewsowchances, in the crash of cos-mic'ed waves
Booming the many points of photonjoys, 
While twillingertwinsinging the geminI'ed pair:
She of the manifested flesh, he of the skillatall potential,
The said and the unsaid united in one verse,
Both read and unread in one fillyall mother?
And are we wee listeners, no longer children,
But as wise as such, restored to our first trusting naiveté 
Just as we longed for when we first felt loved?
Ah, didn't we always know there were always two,
The big volume and the small of the same hookedbook,
Both newly venerable, both found ferally on the high shelf
Of the seadog's shipshaped shop, and both boats,
With their hounding shaggydog smells, covered in magic sigils.
And when we try to read them, they scratch us
With innoculations, and leave a scar of the knowledge
Of starreflections, which jump about in the sleepless
Midnight seas, a scare of untameable ecstacies,
Like tornado knowings whirrling Earth's shallowing dopes
Through the warsour ignoramical nightmarred heavens.
And from this newold firstlast coign of vintage,
The sing-galed light of the finalprimal perspective
Sees down to the vernixed point of our tiny birth,
And up to the infinitemanymakingsumOne ... Ah!
Behold your glassbodied resurrected scelves,
Gathered together in the place of lepers,
Tranceparent supplicanter on all-fors,
A crawler tyro with his sores on show,
Like neon organs, red, blue, citron: Yell: OH!,
The Here We Ares We Don't Know Where We're Goings
Judged with the vengeance of our lasting judgements,
One handiness cupped aloft for virgin alms,
Its fingertips adrip with drops of blood,
Which fall like coins into our begging bowl.
Our quiet corruption within makes howls without,
Praying to work it shout with too-farced words.
Who speaks?  Who cares to know the Who?
It is a whatness where the masker's face
Is bronzed to a permanent bulging of the soul,
The tongue of flesh a morely Superbfacial,
Making a holloweening sound of thunder,
True in production, but temporarily fat
With rumbling muffled memes of timetroughcrests
That amplidtudinously lie about the truth.
The cannibaled chiefstain, who gobbles his facts from his mirror,
Mistakes the sound of grinding teeth on glass
For the ground bass of the Muzak of the sfears,
As if that elevator's blended bland
Could raise the sweet elixir in his spine,
And crown his skull with spirit's rhapsodies.
Oh purple heart on the topknot of the Self,
How has your fountain made the malformed ME
In the silent ocean of your grand lexpression?
But Low!  How the manyteemorus mysteries
Of hystory have draped their dencyst shadows
Over the timetamed purities of our weedlings,
Our merry contrary roses too choked to crow.
Now, know, if perchamps you have snuffed
A certain rottenness ripening 
In the HeroshameUs aftermath
Of the loudest brightness ever warly massed.
Not to worry, this is simply the first of the last of history's blasts,
The perfume of evaporated and/or errorriated
Once wannabe peepholes and rivers and songbirds
And trees and fleas and cities and dogs
And double-helixed worms wafting up the fleu-flown
Apocellipsis at last incompleting in spirals 
That once and for none closed circle of the fried.
Oh Heysous Chrystalus!  Let's not exempt examples,
Since the voice from anon loftstage cries: She is risen!
As pregnent as proving dough that is fit for faking,
The loafers' bun in the oven for a lover's communion,
A fit apotheosis to crucifixion, blood buttering
The fare of our lost supper.  But bedampt,
As my old Damnfarther used to say — Saints bless'em —
If it aint a mirrorcall!  And so it is, as is 
Any run to Frieden, the monomorphic, the diemorphic
And the polymorphic cycling around in any die wreckshun
That is imagined to be dupely pleasing, 
With as much to say to the body as to the soul,
The words and what the words seem being about
Constituting the two-timer's broken versevows,
Or if you'ld rather, the kinkid crying Wolf!
In the seadog's chanty shop, his piratical books
Abandoned as he's out on the yardarm
Choking our chicken scratchings, and turfing 
Up the scriptures of the dead.  Look, 
I know the referents referred to are 
Not always shared, but in poetry
Inaccesable and/or inactive bodily informatics
Are often already angelicized in the listener's
Creation of soulsounds musiacally maximizing
Those uncertainties skulking under the readridinghood 
Of familiarity, which is to sing, the invocation
Oftcrimes known as trance — the whole dark matter
The weirdest invitation to enter the portal
Of the deep unknown.  We have heard much
Of the Dark Aegis of the infant universe,
The perfectly ordered unspacitalized timeless blastocyst
Whose cries and songs were impermantly affixed
As the womb of potential starry WE've's and Adooms,
The rerepeating exhale of I-onization,
Making an I am Ego recall its Subjective
In the formulation of its galaxies, and so
The twins were always insolubly linked:
Spacespeech∞Timehearing, reader and read,
The primal poet awake in her infant bed,
The broken bough of his gravitational fall,
The essential incompletion of tumble-up,
Almost as if it were falling to the ground.
And there's that bass again in the fuguel basement,
Crying from matter's hell to the cupalo's dome,
And out past the ring of illusorry rosey putti
Through the occulus of the bindi's single sEye.
That eye peers through the varied heart of pain,
The pain which pretends to obliterate itself,
Thinking thereby to spawn perpetual joy.
But Joy lies deeper, beyond pretentiousquest,
And at the moment of most virtuosown control,
We fly through a chaos of whirling weatherskins,
Where thought knows nothing — if it knows at all.
We got as close as we could to the zero point
Where one becomes no one in the pointless swirl.
Distraction wins the day, but loses night.
Soul, what are we going to do, forever dreaming
That we are awake?  With patience, wear
The calumny: Imposter.  With patience sort
Through multiplicitous clamors
To sooth the wails of caterwauling terror
Into one sweet serenity of Love.
That quest, shunning all things but this thisness,
Is the invisible magnet seeking Us-ness,
The magnet which magnetizes all that is varied
Into that seadog's voluminous harmony.
We did not understand the concept of conception
Or the lunarluniness of penetration
Erecting the flaccid superfluity
To drive its life into the yielding ove humm.
We did not understand this opalescent light
Expanding its droop through the uterUS nightful ocean.  
What is the writ of this blue cliff plunging down,
But also up and also all around, of the sound
That seas without looking, meets without meeting,
The verse that whirls through all befores and afters,
But has no Now to cling to as regret?
What is this pity in the ocean's depth
That bears our sadness through the infinite,
As free as the wind that currents through the sky?
How can the I say, My sickness is warsensing,
When every symptom sings: That is a lie?
Senescence is only a passive suicide. 
The colliding frequencies breeding bodily health
Must resonate with all the galaxies,
And the rows and rows of sequences and mists
Procede best through the Cloud of the Unknowing ... 
Stop.  Fall.  Stop.
What is the porpoise of this seadog shanti,
This so seditious cetaceous intruding Other,
So lessoning of our humanoid position?
The oracle questions us and not we it.
After lunging about for millenia on dry land,
Must we return to the multidimensional sea,
Our mighty cities left to be wrecked by rodants,
Its I-beams wrested to rust, its glassworks diejested,
Its junctures fingered apart by veiny weeds,
Its skulletall towers made roosts for mobs of birds?
No linger drowning in other peepholes darks,
We're suddenly slicked into a sleeker body,
Swifting about in snakier eloquence.
Hear Now we glimpse the 3-D squeaks and clicks
Which flit amidst our sleepiest in-sumnias.  
Now here we dream our secondarey primal.
Believe, sad dis pairer, past is knotever prologue,
Each instant is all instants and ever new,
The ocean solute is perpetual soul lotion,
Unweaving in flow all ropes of linear rules.
This is a wonder, but is it wonderfull?
The limitless too breeds dangers,
And sweetness most abides where there are borders.
Coagulation brings supreme good fortune,
Decrease of tension's flowering fades to seed,
And suffering fruits large bounties of increase.
The creature of the depths walks forth on fins,
And feels the sunrich limits of horizons.

Canto XXIII
Surprising isn't Lit that all timed space cess
Inslides through the deceased darks 
Of the dimming celves
And brightens their shouts with the swiftliest arrivale 
Of the male odor bribe, who comes, prepaid,
And pain freed from sum alienNation, emerging,
Like the waft of consentricklepeddledrosUs
From sawdust internment or seaincrustation
To show how the redundant revengeances,
When they have finally dropped their anchoring waits,
Rise quickher than guess baubles from the un
Fathomable deeps of that musicall speech
Lunged into songs when the bubbles pop
Into sweet soapy silence.  We were not expecting
Such a simultaniety's cessation of our biogropefleas
Or such a Satunalia's devouring of our sun
In favor of the nighEve Ptolmaniacal return 
To the Whirl of the bury center, our nowhere, no one,
Holding the bride's bright hand on the trippiest trip
We could never imagine knot taking
Spread supersuddenly by kissingword of mouth
When all the convulsive sacreficial orgiastical
Cummune-nate-icall-geneticklishalls spawn
Joys from joy, our twoness woning
In a satiation that surpasses all supercilious sensation
With an utterly sublime virginity.  Up we've cum,
In a zooming that obilterates down,
Arriving at an atmostfearless round,
As if the mutant waning of our swoon
Had waxed to final fullness, its lovelunating silvers
Fixed in frozewaves of shining impermanance
Which shift every nightlife through evernewdnesses.
Lacustrine smoothness mirrors this glassy story:
The tree-snake has ellipseed his pheultony phizz
Into the crater of the Allmom's sigh,
And all the dark to come spews childreny stars.
Well, that at the leased is the Institutional myth
As to why Time sows its grapple seeds in loam,
And why the angel wields his sword of flame
To boundrytize the marble orchard's inmates.
Listen ... what's that murmering munching
Of slithering presciptions transloosening beneath
The soil ... ?   Souls maybe ... subversive ones,
Lunching on pharmaceuticalized remains
To contra-indicate the arrogant doctors,
Who gather their sliming flesh in the undermazes
The same as their impenitent patient patients,
And just like them at last cured of their treatments
To be communion wasters for blind worms ... 
Blood wine in little insipid sippies
Priested to drain mortality's sea of pain ... 
O Holy, Wholey Mother of our Grope, you bird the ground
For grubs for your featherless chicks, the coos
Of your doves cracking the the night at dawn,
And the cause of your crows blacking the dusk
At leavefling.  Is this what the cycling ellisping psalms
Are refraining, and do these revolutions whipperdo
Starblighted vacuums into burgeoning plenums?
The probeable prob-balistics of your poems
Seem to explode the Institution's myths,
Without replacing their shadtears with your own.
Around your crown weave pale funereal lilies
Insight of which is No New to behold,
So brightly shines your ever absent pre-sense.
Torment and bliss in touchless oneness lie,
Their songs the saddest gladdest lullabyes,
Proclaiming in whispering thorns roundrounding rosebuds
The ecological flightmares of a spring
Whose whatery throat tornadoes through the ear,
Volcanoing funneling fires through the mind
And lavalizing magma in the heart.  We live
Right through our dying when your songs
Inebriate their supple ordinaries
In myriad subtle mundance miracles.
Do you remember now how very pleased
You were to drown in streaming Motherese,
Your need to grasp her dynamo of speech:
Find, want, get, put, run, open, close, hide, seek,
And the feeling of come, of go, of eat, of leave,
How the agency of milk came through the throat,
As well as through the breast,
How the can, the do, the make, incited play
And never ceased to specialize that name,
Which lived inside the wonder of your ME,
And kept its shape 'though her command was: sleep.
Oh read me that story, Mommy, which turns off fright,
And leaves your starsight watching through the night,
And if my cradle breaks the bough, and falls,
Cushion me with that plop whose plot enthralls.
But how, my dearest Mommy, should we hear
Your intimate voice?  Is it nearer yet mistier, or farther away,
Yet brighter?  And is its nebulous shadow the result
Of photon-photon collisions of mine and Mind,
Which fissure their remnant radiance through a heart
Already broken the moment its beat is born
Into the temporal world of wombs and tombs?
And how does the fairy tale suture part to part?
Maw's voice is heavenscent, yet softly tells
Of the baited Basilisk beneath the bed,
The Lucifearian lurker, whose protean body,
Embedded with genie gems Cain take the shape
Of any combinatorial spawn of letters
Whose shimmering shinings spell out any fete.
Confetti-ish shreddings saturate the air.
But what can these fluttering flummurmarys be,
But the rags of our measurements'
Mini projections of space, beyond whose smithering
SMotherings nothing is heard, the timings
Left as particulur'd-rising ticktalks
Blathering axioms of the greet's unknown?
Trivial secrets, tautology's secretions,
Circling around the absence of a fright,
Mere mandalas of an illooswary embryo bodhi,
A drama dreaming of glittering sightless slights.
But what has been done to achieve this wholey insight?
Was it writ? was it read? was it rigaMawrole re-sited?
As far as the child reasons, nothing was done,
It was only the freeing drift of a becoming
Which happens only when only happenstance happens.
Is everything thus permitted?  Once I said the G-word
To an unbeliever, and he recoild, as do most wondrous aemobas 
When touched by spiney acid.  But I believe I should also
Be unbelieving, lest I be burnt by falsehoods.
Am I condemed for this to fuel Hell's fires?
The names of Her Itness or His are innumerable,
Yet the tongues of leaves pronounce them night and play.
I cannot accept the promptings of my mind
To garner ends that end in suffering, 
And so my heart remains recalcitrant,
Perceiving only the imperceptible,
And wallowing in Ephemra's hallowed Mother,
As if her blubber were a ghostly Other,
Unclutchable yet palbable in the hutch.
This I surmise is the double 13th key
To the impregnable safe of the Alpha bed,
Whose lock defies all opening Sesemes.
(I've mistaken your 1 for my 5, and my litters propound,
As was bound to someway happen to such an ageling
Forgetful of his infant ABC's.  Mea culpa! Mea culpa!
Mea MixyMaw culpa!  Which doesn't mean to say
That I am sorry, as your unconditional grace
Forbids me be.)  Ah, for how many tears has this stream streamed
Through red gorge country defying the desert petras
Of dry speech?  And who were the aborginal wondersing
Anxtquesters who gouged their myths in stony galleries?
And what does it say about our Motherese,
Whose many spoken first oralities,
Were never written but in adamant symbols
Which look most like extinct marsupials,
Whose pouches squeeze out meming embryos
To feed the nomad tribals of lung dreams?
So there you halve it, eternal maternal mélanges
Of minxed messages, delivered in fiery diatribes
Of ice, and like these ancient tests of petrafiction,
Decried in stony artifits to the stoned.
But wasn't it still a kin of glad intrusion,
These messages rising from a weird downunder
Which boomerrang their crosststicks up the spine,
Going and coming and rising and sinking in pulses 
As an ocean's tides bestrew a sand expanse
Like stars by-passing stars that drop and climb?
Such questions keep questing through the sleepless mind: 
How is a body to weave its harmonies
From such devoted diabolic threads,
Which flit across the rockface of a head
Fixated on a dissonance chanting: Dead,
As if that were life's finalized decree?
Now's Now is the numb to pose the crucial questions.
Why do the body's X'es X out each other,
And inch their Xistence towards a last Xstinction?
And why does all that is matter no longer matter?
(I ask this for a friend, who thinks I am none.)  
Is the pain of self-contradictions' ranging rages
Through the resignation of an umbilical 
That pumps the spirit milk to this old baby
Hooked to the Mother of all and the Mother of Death?
I understand many things, but not this I
Which exists as a war between its own conclusions,
And jumps through a short cut through interminable pain
To reach a completion of incomprehensible bliss.
Breathe in.  Breathe out.  And ask your comatose self:
Does anyone pray for me as I'm dissolving?
Blip.  Pause. The vision comes.
She is young ... who?  She who waits at the foot
Of the mountain ... why?  To allow the fool
To approach the purity of the spring
Where she is waiting ... what full? ... the sunnone
With the persistant disease of undisciplined flow.
These lines of water whipwhirl in opposition,
And yet her most humbling template pacifies them,
And the worlding liquidities fall through the skullskyhole
Where the longings line up and the fountiknell reopens.
The fire rises where the waters fall.
And the MotherLover heals the gabbing gap
When his bounding jump jumps through her boundless whole.

Canto XXIV
Faith: one of the true words, insofar as it does not
Suffer whatever it is or is not to be catagorized as a person,
Nonperson, place or no place, thing or knot thing,
And so in-visibly, yet neither definite nor indefinite,
It cannot be said to act, yet Lit's the cause of action,
Because we hear the sportive dog's body bark
At the imaginary cow which jumps on her milky way
Over the blank new moo.  Sew udderly slident, its circulating
Vapor needles its way through the thread which weaves
Time's robe, that robe that so disastrously is wan
Thru a casting of lots by a gaggle of blundering soldiers, 
Who play in the shadow of the drearily crucified.  
What's that you bray?  HeHawing your assinine 
Spec ululations into the mouth of the ear of dereliction?
Why it's
The entropy of the laugh which preseeds the joke,
Eructive as a dry heave at an odor, which circulates
Like Gold among the poor, alive in the pockets of those
Whose need is most, but whenever looked for 
In those dark holey alcoves, only a residue of lintish light
Appears, not worth that bucket of warm spit spewed
By the pastor.  It was not, was never, will never
Be getable by any means but those of Ubu Roy,
Which is to say, by a pataphysical monster,
Playing at playing, afeast on communion wasters
Entirely malformed from the stink of shit.
Are you shocked?  Are you convulsed?  Have you finally
Succumbed to your symptoms?  Do you think about
Judass'es rope as a release?  Are you dangling in the sea
Of incontinence, pissed that you lie in dark's dark
UnAbel to see?  Do you gag from the very bottom
Of your belly, vomiting nothing but your empty hope
That things will be righted by your badder angels?
Have you accepted Absurdity's three-fingered hand
As your cartoon gigglesum personalpustuled slavior,
And peered through the stigmata of that bland,
Like the house detective peeking through three keyholes,
Expecting to see the adulterous Atom and ClEve
Whose coitus perverts eternity to breed?
The springs on the bet are squeaking in a riot
Which bounces out the need for some crude story,
Some once upon a crime, which ghosts like this:
First there was Morph and of course Morph,
Being overfat, had to have somefling that
He might hang his blobs on, and Miss Morphinator
Was just wombmoan enough to bilk his fill.
Although to tell the sooth, she was rather lean,
So skeletal in fact that across the narrative
That spun between them each postulated an invisible pet,
A dog or cat or crow or dove that had to be there
Because Miss Morphinator, vaporous as she was,
Kept mutely mouthing pitapatapet, as if she sensed
In their midst a homing instinct.  We could hardly
Call this phenomenon, if indeed such existed,
A way through their dielemma, for between his this
And her that only an oscillation was established,
And neither could tell which which was which,
Or even if the other was a nother.  But the animal
In their path, began to dizzy, spinning this she around her he,
And so velocity was born, and with this howling, yowling,
Cawing, cooing came music, a music that moved
In ever swifting ellipsyncs.  So now you know,
When the faithless ironically speak of faith,
It's because they have learned to mouth this song,
But nobody knows for sure what noise is behind it,
For the muse has battened its memings down with silence.
Are you saying that this cry was the cry of their child?
There seems to be no evidence that there was One.
I am saying that this cosanguineous couple
Were obviously Nature lovers.  How sow?
Observe the profusion of their predilictions,
Those wilder welters of flowers in their scenes
Of so many colors a rainbow could not spell them, 
Nor could a notional boundary his nomadness,
Nor could her pregnant swellings be aborted,
They being free as air, fecund as ocean,
And yet for all their many manynesses they were
But halves half visible, half unseen,
As swift from east to west as is the sun,
As infinitessimally pokey, west to east,
As is the zodiacal evermores.  
Wherever you look their fierce electricals
Convert to heat whose light demands dispersal
In megajoules of false theologies,
Their speculations, rationed from the stars,
Affirm their most absurd of origins.
Assured by the insaintity of belief,
Just as though one and one make one again,
And never could be anyblink like two.
Does this X bar the purely syntatactical, and nullify
The cloudy clumpliment rule in order
To praydetermine the infamous f-struts? — f stands for function,
And not what you were reading graffittied
On those sleezy restwomb wails, complete
With headless/legless illustrations abstracted
To crudely emphasize what's hidden.
We seek expository ease, not eloquence,
My voyeuristic fiend.  Even the copious egg
Of mammalian-banter remains but potential
Until a prompt has pricked it.  Stand up
Before the maestro, you poor basturd,
And question his ever garrulous credentials.
He rose to emeritus status by being prudish,
By generalizing, distorting, and deleting
Whatever in your song was poetry.
The weening of the simplest nursery rhyme
Spins far beyond his philosophic taste.
You have a heart that beats beneath your tongue
Whose rhythm cosmitizes tears or laughter,
Adding the secret ingradiant of a feeling
Which dazzles darkness into whirling stars —
A reign of stars that rain down in a night
Insommaniacal in your lone predawn black,
Except that in all that doubt and misery 
There is that singular joy of duple stars,
Binaries accreting one another's light
In gravitational coitus, much like the read and writ recited,
In a convection of cataclysmic wonder
Which wanders among mysterious number codes
That celebrate an alphabetic light: Angular momentum's
Love affairs whose revelations forge asymmetries.
She loves me, he loves me not, as if the same reversed
Were false or true, and this one question healed 
Or broke a heart.  I ask you now, twice innocent
Batchorrolelette, have you passed your examination,
And earned your Nitwit Wittywit DimLit — your N.W.N.?
At this stage, One could hardly put Nothingness passed you.
Still, because eternity opens to catechchism, we ask:
How do you kill the intestinal worm of worry?
How do you excise the graft of habitual shame?
How do good guardians safeguard the keepsakes of others?
Does Mist Through the Grove sing the same as Eddying Water?
How do you uncreate fallacious logic, 
And cauterize the sore of superstition?
How may you grow contempt for temporal honors?
The practice of cracking answers with bludgeoning questions
Is the murdering ignorance that nullifies the world
And resurrects the void in the solar plexus
Which golds with peace that old infecting absence.
We have only to be persistent in our quandaries,
Drum our conundrums with our callused feats.
We have only to make our dupletriple beats
As free as the dust that rises from our dance.
So what if there is no music, so what if we limp round and round,
We listen to Love's grace and not to sound.
'Though the affairs of darkness hold no light,
Lanterns for others still shine from cold, blind eyes. 

Canto XXV
Of these invisiwheels Hope is the middlewhizer
Flipperflinging the outertwo, though their trinity
Rootates its own tryplaces in anyone — or one/fore
Who believes intently in the SuperSelf's certainty,
An attitude hard to hold when the feet of clay
Crumble up to gravely cancerize the fleshtemps piecemeal
With liberal helpings of fear and pain.
When the mothermatter is in dispute, who can rely
On the fathertemplate to render refuge?  The 
Baccalaureates, I guess, those who've been clouted
With life's cruels and baptismally schooled
In pools of revelation, the lovers, in briefs,
Lawdeedawed in revelation in lieu of logic,
And not ashamed to say so.  They've pulled their heads
Out of their guesses, and seen the light,
Which holds their hearts in ITS hands —
And here the read thing beats its offerings,
Blinded by such devotion that it devolves
From salvagedsenescent sage to naive child,
An infant in the lap of cloudy kisses.
Martyrdoom is moot, and the pilgrims
Plod to the places of healing miracles
Over seas turbulant with choppingly undulant fates
To kneel at the empty tombs of those apostles
Whose relics rot to little piles of jewels,
Indistinguishable for doubters from rat droppings.
And the crippled pilgrims grin, dancing away
From their maladies in the the throes of holy melodies,
Which nobody hears who isn't whirledly weary.
Butwhat does this even mean?  What prospects
Are hearbye revealed and what retrospects reordered?
And why do these spinnings seem always to flash
Mythemetical numerations wherein the mother mutates,
But the father fixes?  Too fast or too slow to count,
The ones flare out to twos, the twos whirr into threees,
The threes collude with fours, which all in all
Wing back to one again, breathless breathing
Freezing vapors to stars and starring scars to vapor,
So that we thoughtlessly think, NOW, this is not anythink
We could have thought of, so what loka motif
Is wherewith this Extraterrestrial sun the plantit of:
Our dead?  Yes, here they are are a gain, alive and well.
Our unborn?  Sure, here they come aloft, and almost more so.
But examination time tells also of the liquifictionists
Worming and squirming and slitherly serpentining
Through and around discarded mortal sheathings, and also
Sometimes gumming up the works in living cells,
Getting a jump on the disintegration process,
And mocking, what might surprise you or us to mix
Elixirs that are to orders of angels nectars,
Whose bursting skinless sweetnesses
Enable them to sing mere humans praises.
So you see there flows a sea of inbetweens
Washing the low slops and the high sails
And goldening both shores as infinitly currenting
As you please, and if you doubt this, check the ole Text's Wridders,
And reread the ReadSea whaters where they've split,
One side in deepest protestprostrations
And the other rising in tiertears of celestyouall spirals.
What?  You don't understand?  You say: Name names,
And leave off paraphrasing periphrastics.
But you must know that I's cannot look straightly
Into such sutured severences sununsundered.
Unwrest your material lowghost is double blinded,
You'll only sniff corruption and not balm.
These words will not be that of funereal lilly,
So indiscreet in her witless amorousness,
So obvious in her lust to be scentnoticed,
But of the orienting navigations of chrysanthemums,
So humble in their beautiful affirmations
That poets kneel to touch them with their fraces,
Living in scenturies of afterlife, content to remain
Ephemeral volatiles, impervious to trivial decay,
And spelled from out those foolish tenements 
Of testy testicular theophlipic testaments
That so encompass the students of mere flesh.
Let us not fear, they sing, hypepurpleplease,
When such a charmingness makes her presence felt.
For she has bathed her health in forest feelings,
From cradle fallen on broken bowing rainboughs
To rhizome rootballs knotting ancient graves,
And nothing permeates her everything
But love of what has been, will be, and is,
Prenatal's postmortals in superfinest mysts
Of medicines impervious to sorrow.  What!
What the devil do you mean by these mad boomer joys,
You, the offender wordplaying around
In your who's who dissertations, 
Given to too mush sarcasm, sacrificing flippancy
For sincertainty, exploding miffs with myths,
And now expecting someone, anynone,
A ninny, a naffin, a numbskull in the swim,
To cling to this spar of a shipwreck christened HOPE,
As if the Word were some imperishable would,
Destined to root in the sea and ascend to heaven,
And thereby ripen first fruits in sweetest clouds ...
Stop!  Who I am is one tried by betrayals,
Adept at reading both sides of the dense,
And poised at the tipping point abovebelow,
Inverting the downpouted hoop of your listps grief
Into that ever-dazeappearing smile
That lovers see cavorting in newmoonflight,
The loon on the lack that whistles away aloneness
In the very hardest dark of solitude.
I am the heshe who weaves the quartette's notes,
So separate in their sinuous explorations,
To that one meeting swoon called harmony.
My name is MaleShestrom, 
And I am the shehe frequentcy 
Telescooping the super-missieve to the microdigestable. 
I am the everlonging everlusting IT,
The One Great None, only visiblyaudible
In the blacksense nodules of metaphoric taste,
Where the underlying data sweeps around,
As was aforesaid at your nascency,
Providing Mother's milky whey of light.
Dumbfounded aliens who stumble upon my rites,
Are astonished at the statue in my temple.
Four heads I have: one facing, one reversed,
One lift, one write, and in one hand a horn
That holds first blood, and in the other
A lightning bolted sword, my foot a grantIT mountain,
My roof the Vast, and no priest wired
With piety's infobeard, may breathe within
My holy sanctuary, so that he only enters
Between breaths, and exits souly to exhale my praise.
Still, if the primitive is what you seek,
The providence of true prognostication,
This icon of my idol will requite you.
Are you then Hope, the hinge of verification,
Which opens the door to aesthetic amplitude,
That style among styles alone to be trusted?
I am and I am not, for the perfection of one style
Is the death of others, and among the dead
Are many living voices, shaking your skeleton
Loose from lost potentials, and making imperfection's gullibles
Ungarble those diseases of the tongue,
Which only speak of sendings and besendings.
If you seek the ford to cross these verbal turmoils,
Then ask the native breaking clods for graves.
He does not shun one person or another,
But shuns this very world which foments corpses,
And placid as a worm, he splits his clods,
His antic analecticks quiping "Spring."
You will not find his likeness among the petty,
But companied with beasts and birds and clouds.
You scholars of minutia, do not, like this one,
Stoop to menial tasks, for if you till the land
With your smooth hands, it would become
As barren as your cities.  You have invited
The missing God of Time into monied calculations,
And that has made you deaf to mathemusic.
What facts of the I are basic, and which are sham?
Of that and that alone this poem sings.
When one has attained the center of the spin,
The wind of anxious breath is sweetly stilled,
The insubstantial substantiates itself
Invisible as light inside a stone. 
If the child in the adult feasts on dreams,
It is because the beast beneath the bed
Sleeps peacefully on the gold of Hope's rich treasure,
No longer a threat, but a guardian,
So gaudy in its shining gemlight scales
That all its flashings blind the vision's doubt.
The lights beneath their lids dart back and forth,
And in the heart of our parental watch,
This question comes to sooth the sleeping child:
Have you sought so long in vain for what Hope vows
That when it dawns you're swamped by consternation?
Fear's abscence now presents its homely whole,
And in that pure-rayed muddle your inn spins.

Canto XXVI
In the imaginear, species of ephemerall smell beings
Gather to collect the pains proliferating at physical life's Xstreams.
These nonninnytease are most happy folksters,
Gaily aswirling around in almost Emmortal memes,
And able to metaphor themselves on less than a single molecule.
Thus, when we breathe, we touch these pheromone philosophers'
Pairadice, such that even in the throes of chance, their scent
Trail of angelfooled fake inflames, not only our entrials,
But all our tongue buds too.  Now we taste what we
Might sing, and even the most atrocious images — say 
For exsimple, so many of those Egyptian goddessly buzzards
Wrapped round the rarified rot of a roadkill,
And giving off those edgy frightlyscents, which preclued the sight
With blinding insight — so that we seize, not see,
A kind of pattern of almost abscent sinsuality
That seems in the instant of its breath, the thrall in All.  
So you recall that even in shit, IT remains
As the flowery purefumes, which, gland in gland, all lovers
Blithely stroll through.  Now does your heart understand
How the inhaling of such medicinal volatiles
Of May blooms may lust the lifetimes of a fundred
Enthuselahs, whose matrapatreearchies stretch
Every wishaway through Time, always loopingdelieuing
Through those three-faux-fum-funny bone budings
Of cast, prescent, and futechars with all the suppletease
That could tickle twitch the tip of a tongue to flop in the Spring's breeze
Like a champion's freshfurling pennant?  We won!  We One!, we shout,
And all those odor criters dance about, remembering
The gross points of their origins and returning the flavor
Of birth with the gift of a lithesome perpetuity.
This everlasting communion is as toothsome as it is tasty,
Although in every way as insolid as the air inside a beauloon.
But the release! the release! when we finally awake
At night from our dark insomnia, sharpened to loon's eye focus
On our spreading lake of pain, so alone in such moonbright,
We need the touch of the belovèd's hand to restorm
Our former frantic seeing, and here, here, even at the apex
Of our agony, to feel her Caritas, and so sink through the depths
Of her calm.  However far we have sailed from the safe port
Of orthodocks, however much on this lack we are at sea,
Our seeing subtly opens through her crotch,
And we fully become what we were meant to be,
No more than a breeze through the leavings of the leaves,
And so unboundly free, we seem in our ecstasy
To be virtually bodiless, and yet remain a balm
To all pained bodies, as if the love we feel for these at most sfears,
Were the source of blessings for those physiculls
Awaiting transport from death's colony
To that superb unfinalfine infinity,
Which drapes all images in blindbling gold,
And pearlizes words to scent's entrancings.
Hurrah!  Now hear what the I in between —
Deceased John Doe — has to say when he's questioned
About this genederous source.
Let the eye in the midst announce a holiday: 
The questioner is dead to questioning, 
And the nitwit answerers run free of expertsleaze
As swift as nits from the bald of parted fur, 
Let the whole kit and kaboodle of nettling doubts 
Be scratched like a single itch by the Lord's middle finger.
But be furtive, by God, be skitish, 
These water holes in the desert dry up quickly,
And predators lurk around them awaiting prayers.
It is best to dig a warren in higher ground,
Ground that is far less holy but harder to hallow.
You have to pick it out in tiny fragments,
And break your beak in the heat on its baked hard rubbher,
And after three days of this labor, you have to hide there,
With only the tiniest peephole to peer beyond.
For the cost will very seldom be all clear,
And only in that rarest midday blue,
Which crisps the brains of watcher and watched alike,
So that neither knows if it's creditor or pay.
Gone grant you may glimpse that musical magical moment
When the squiggling lines above the Ancient's mirage
Mate in that single drop that can quench your thirst.
Exile and nomad, inching along the bottom of your lacks,
You have shrunk your unilluminated readings
Down to such a stenotropickly skint
That pain is about the only change that moves you,
And so this text, painful as it might be, is the only step
On the subterrain of the agon, which could be the up
You need to combat your downs, the slopslip on the steep
That could lead to light, and efface, even if through 
Pain's  murder of your body, your squinty stenophotic self.
Open your mouth and make your words your food, 
Your euryphagous diet is too restricted, 
And all the stuff you stuff creates disease,
And blocks the elixir-nectar that you need.
You smell that smell? you Wombrat, it is your sibling potential
As yet unborn.  Suppose you had twin notions
In your head, and the phoneme of these are two alike to hear:
So/sow, sea/see, show/show.  You have to steel
Your mind against this steal, or you must buy
A bye, and find that two can barely bear such sameness.
The mind makes one of two and shrinks the heart.
Or suppose-sing in your con-verse, you wind your wind,
And bat your belfry bats, so that the whole ringamarole
That rolls your Are's makes mysteries, as quick as Saints make martyrs.
These cosmological discoveries in the cardinal points
Of the sky, the trail of the cow that swooned through her
Milky stray, by memes of lingwhimsical instewmentations
Refeel huge Rosetta structsures linking our galaxy's nucleus
To the nuclei of alien galaxies.  Any child worth his
Tale-a-scoops knows the densities and temperatures
Emitted by these cartoonish speech bubbles,
And snurts:  These are the key characteristics of those timescale shookwaves
Parentally called laughter.  Lists of Atomic slumburrs
Always fallow such shocks, but the numbers have only
A slykick value, which Edenly can gig a child's giggle.
So what, Mistmissheir Callous Sophisticate, is wrong with you, 
Losing your soul in hooking for an answer,
Instead of wallowing in these heavenly wonders?
Surely your inner tick-tike smells a rate
As fibrillating as the stunned heart's mockwork,
Clocked through the lingering scent of the belov'd,
As sumpthink surpassing the blanding speed of blight.
Who knows how many volumes of erstwhile lifetimes
You might find writ in your polyglot corpuscle books,
How much untrancelabial wisdom you might birth forth — all here, 
In the very air you breathe.  But stop, wait,
Who is this entity whom you refer to as Who?
From Who's Mind flows wow Pourer.  When Who is speaking,
Rightening bolts rain zigzags from the desert night's raw roof,
Igniting fear in ignorant negators, love in wise affirmers.
Well, well, well, Who is the well of quenching purities,
Not unreliable creation-creature, but source of such.
We are not speaking here of the passive ovum
Or the active sperm, all such bi-assed YinYang
Descriptors block the sinulating sinuosity's path
To Power.  The tongue muscle is a very aggresive
Magnet, which attracts to its egg its own egg's penetrators,
So what do you say to that?  What do I say to that?
I say says.  It's a refrain, see?  As in Says says
The sleeping state of the adult machine
Dreams it is woke, says, but its woke is neither
Ecstasy nor exhileration, but rather robotic 
Arrogance, says ... sea?  You mean the sea of smell-speech,
Says, I mean its banal music, it machinery clattering
Health into disease.  You don't say, says. 
You're talking in circles.  Yes, but my circles, says,
Are a medicine wheel, etching on land
The mythmists' stellar alignments.
You got a hurt?  You got a fatal ailment?
Just put your ear's feet on this ring-aground
Dragony's path, and you will listen your noisome
Way to health.  But heed: Discipline is not subjugation,
Such submission to these devotional testualities
Will do much to endbegin around the obstacles
Of your pre and/or post natal pre or/and post mortal whims,
You will not comprehend, but you will change,
As does any parasite who sucks the guru's blood.
That you have traversed universes of abominations
Has cluttered your consciousness with loveless hope,
But the charity of that purer blood can bond you
To the loving faith of freedom.  The ease comes
After effortfull devotion.  Make a vow, and honor IT.
So simple to say, says, so difficult to enact.
That the will will waver is no comfort for the warrior,
Yet any wind, like the breath, may deviate
Times × Times without number, and yet return,
Without the count of Time.  To return is to read turn,
Like a wafting scent, to the realm of Greater Choice.
To return is to turn again in your Atom's Eden,
Where extinction immortalizes through devolving pains.
That all the calendars clog with countless casualties
Should remind the militant witless that no breeze
Becomes sick in Self's self, though it carries the ghosts of toxins
In fallible figures.  These — prophets like to post
As prophecies — while angels love to sing them to perdition.

Canto XXVII
Look, you are seeing through the I-holes of the mask,
And reading the littered litersmall shapes of letters
As symbols worming through your virtual hearholes,
And the more you hear, the more musical 
And intense the animation, so that the mask,
Though made of vapepoors, seems to thicken
Into the portrait of a God.  But what God is this,
Who is dispersed to nothing by that breath
An infant makes against a monstrous fearror?
Yes, a child can easily imagine being anyfling,
And when tasked: Ginny, what do you want to be
When you throw up?  Is just as apt to say,
A hoarse, as a fireman or a cosmotale-igest,
Knot nowing in shisz naivete that those bleakean
Horses of instruction don't do so well in life's
Nomadic desert, dropping down dead, their hearts
Torn out by sumstroke, or breaking their delicate
Legs of loconotion by stepping in some snakehole,
And thereby becoming a home for flensing hordes
Of necrophagic flies.  The last buzz twitchbewitching
Their learnnerd ears are those of damnation's deniZen's
Derisive duh-dunceations — hardly a heavenly choir,
But perhaps the last trumpparting act of retribution
Before the virgin vulture printcessors tote their hizzstorybits aluft
In a flurry of beaktorn peaces, the plodding pedants
At last digested and outgasguessed in the farts of flyers.
The child gasps UH! being thrusted into adulthood,
Saying: Say, it was not sub-post to pre like this,
Not yet knowing that the Earthweather's treacheries
Were only the initial stages of an initiation ceremony
Which would lead to Xactly what.  One says-sees now
That point-of-new is everywink, and that suddenly
With love-spies space expands so that one's chance
Fatalities and plethoras of agonies appear everywhere
In the velvet dark as galaxies of infinitesimally whirling dots,
Light swarms that eat up eons of time in flashes,
The whole weird wheel of the Zodiac whirled to a stop.
There still of course might be some twinnging tussels
Between motormother and philosophfurther, but these
Are but the chokedchuggins of the dying machinery    
At lunglast breathlossly running out of fools.
Who effer BooWho is, Whodoo is rapidly arriving
At the moment of Ruth — who is, as Who well knows,
The younger more innocent sister of Mysstress Ruthless,
And yet in all the time Who knew the storied spinster,
Who never met this kinder, prettier Mist, nor ever bathed
In the light of her trued eyes.  Mercy Me! 
Is that sumpstink I got to cry about finally funny?
Fear shear!  In any laugh at all, the lost sheep's found,
And wears a wolf hide for his joke's protection.
And Ho Ho how all wee accidental heretics hear her herd
Of negative words: If the tempest rages, your I Am
Is not shaken.  If your wounds hemorrhage,
Your fears will not bleed froth.  Your crown is
Granite jutted, and its pining stands
Atop its grief for grace.  At last, your Medieval hates
Are now updated, and finally stripped of the anguish
Of seeking justice.  Evil guns wild, but so does inspiration,
So what are you going to do?  The general hidedias
About the pattern hite Homo Stasis is about to be
Less randomly rewired so that reversals in the replay
At a mullion or more iterations might produce
God knows what, and Who might finally be the WiseSire,
Or some such mothering invention made of starstuffers,
The baby's toys that turn the words to worlds.
So these earliest crudes of raison in the morerass
Of uncertainty arrange their souls in fluctuating feelds,
Defydefining all borders of theologic.  You mean we live them.
You could say that, if you were one Who is. 
Your cancer is culled, but so is the rest of Who,
Who is now but the tiniest twinklewinking star,
The luminous legacy of his leastness alive in flight.
Like waves that deckle ripples in the sand,
Who's stages of initiatory plights
Erase in every subseaquent language's lapping
The well-formed structures of their origins,
And all that was or wasn't ends to begin,
As if its new arrivals were parentless,
Or rather were the latest virgin of.
You ask, Who am I?  Going shamelessly nameless
In the whirl of your levitation, as if 
You had bounded over the milky moon
And had landed seadonly on the warping deck
Of the infamous Flying Clutchman — food half-eaten 
On plates, their moralmorsals still forked,
Pots in the golly still steaming,
Cigarettes curling languid vapor snakes,
The lipends of their cylinders still spittled,
And shoes, their tongues hung out,
Without a foot to stand in, vamping silence.
All of the signs of life, and no one living, 
And the ship adrift in the currents of this Oh!sheen,
No port that has form for your refugee destination,
And nothing to aim for among the troughs and crests
Of temporal's sighing temporary raves.
You were never on board, nor will ever abound amain.
The answer is: Don't throw salt in the eye of the flaw,
And never doubt that these poor orphaned objects 
Abandoned by the mutineering crew
Are not themselves the spirits of the drowned,
Transcending purposeless persons to be of use.
However, 
Since you are still incoma'ed 
In your childhid's post-breath cloud, 
You will not want to return to invent strange words
And to multiplay the game of loss and love 
In some landlocked body beraft of the bounding's beauty.  
You will have curtainly richly forgotten,
And be vowed to recreate the bowls of vowels
And the knifeforkconsonantshipshapes of the spoons, 
So that all those kabballistic riduall chews
That could Golum their way into tonguing a talkative servant, 
Will have to munchedmenschedmacerate their foods,
As your Oldstir recommunions your wayfared youth,
To regugitate the bolus to new pupas.
Rattle ... Riddle ... Ruttle ... 
All those redemptuous stridulations
Of simulatedswarming insectwaddle
Ruttle ... Rattle ... Riddle ... 
Et set hurrah, et set hurrah, ad nauseum ... 
So will the machine mechanically mutilate
The living Word and all its lively derivitives.
Un nurturely, it will claim that its pisston-driving drevil
Is true prayer.  But Baby will die when set to suck
That pap, because, though the front of the mind
Roars piously, the depth of the heart shrivels
In such Xhaust.  Shall we be robed in the breath
Of tangible spirits, or will we be swaddled in synthetic dust?
Well, when the Word devolves to make mere representations
It cannot in-synch with any created phenoms,
So Mother weeps tears through deflated mummeries,
And Father billows Laws from his Bibliculled hoarse.
Stop!  You're only critiquing the practice of mommifying,
Which placed the brain and heart in its own arc,
And wrapped the rest to marinate in rags.
IT says it is time you discovered that the who you are
Is never in doubt, and like the crystalline cognition
You cogitate on a clear mourning after a night's deep sleep,
Disturbing dreams notwithstanding, or like a good end
After a breathlessly blue premature parturition,
The old man looks at his baby pictures and, regret-
Rejoicing at those bronze-shoed prophesies,
The fleet of his speech turns round,
As an ocean of water turns sky at the horizon,
And the poops go prowy — POW! — the pennants flying
East from a westward course, the winter speeding
Warmly into spring, as his dithering steadies
Into Oraculeer salt:  What time is this when flesh
Wars with the sun, rebellious of its origins,
Thinking it is a light unto itself, and mistaking
The phosphorescence of the cadaver, for the blush
Of life apulse on infant cheeks?  Says says this too
Is a kind of progress, although from flesh to what,
None dare to guess.  To possess in great measure
That which Death desires, this too breaks
The stasis of habit's mummifying, and enthuses,
Through delusion, a livelier fate.

Canto XXVIII
This brings us quasi penultimately to the question
Of what we have often refered to by the phaze
I am nest, a Get, quite ancient, tracing 
Its origin back to glyphy E-gypshun sources — now
Defunct, save for their gigantic dot.con ruins, and further
In arears, timewise, in the still loafing trybull clutchures
Whose inslights symbolically into causemology,
Speak of Am, Amma, Amen, et saidhurrah, magical
Words, embodying the moirés of the godly, 
Albeit hidden, weavers of muttermatter
And fartherstuff, which to our contempoor
I's and leers, appear voiced in that phase/face/phrase
Rindrhyming through that fine network of slurfaced crackedlecher,
As in that life moment of winter when the I.C.E.
Of the lack we have been hearing with its antic
Loonacies, crazes, so that when we try to read
The meaning of those random lielines
Confusion reigns — E. Gee: Each segmentation
Becomes domained in irregularities
Whose inertless fracturing geometries are studied, 
And pontificated upon by — you guessed it — 
Xperks.  That we have woven from these intingling thReads
A previous diescraption when we aspirated
Through the hellements in Hell is now reculled
In distortions that were pryviously forglottyn:
Numbly: If one grates every partickle
Of space of plauseable existences as a fleeing
Feeling and a shrinking sought, then, as reeling feelings
And thinging oughts, the pauseability of communication
And cooperation exists from lendity to lendities.  Magic then
Becomes a skein of longtwistic eloquence which entangles
Speakers and lesseners in skewed boundingsings of poettry, 
And the Gods, when there cum such, foamed by these kinkages,
Become the epic speakers and lessonpeers, which shape
Eons of timings and pulyoulaze them.  Amen! ... or if you prefer, 
Amma! ... or even, if you're mummymeditation rapt: I am.
It is in this instant that one may gaze into the very twinkle
Of the lover's eyes and see there the orbiting electronNations
Of the gestationating numbers, which those who
Have seen, suddenly feel that there are at least fine swings
That they may elliptically count on.  These may be
Ennumerated in gropes of spree, each regressively
Widerwilder and less bright until we recoil, cut-ganglion-like,
From ignorant, brillant, innocent, angelic infancy,
To something allmust unreCognizeable as that gear
Which turns the machine of deadly power
So greased by each serpentinesociety 
That it Molochly grinds each babe of us to dust.
Oh Nobly born, the introdictions are over,
And you have now interred the Bardo of burial
By air, the priestbutcher feeding your corpse
Piece by peace to those heavenly vultures
That we have spoken so often and so lovelessly about.
Ah soul, you thought I was only wishbeguiling
That this aging era lacking flowing throughness 
Is only an interim interpretation
Becuss of an indiejestiable asteroid
That had to hit in Time's due curse 
To suspend our animations.  And you thought
Well ... we might as well dwell here as nowhere,
East of any hedonist's Eden, 
Because surely such circulating circulations are unmutable —
Unlike bees in flowers and brides in tease —
Because, in all this motion there must be a pause,
Just must be a place, where the ghost in the machine waits,
Waits where light wafts, dangling his skeleton 
On the twiggy nest of his last forblighted love?
But how to get there?  Note: From the road's last curve,
Our hike threads West on a broad, flat pain,
Shaded by black oaks and towering fears,
Soon we come to a spur trail, which contours North,
Climbing steeply beside the blurbling voices of Root Creek.
At Blog Belly Bridge — collapsed — our way wends West again,
Where, on a forested clifflip, arriving at Mumbling Springs,
Through the winking apartures of bigleafed maypalls,
We glimpse the granite crag of Crasstle Dome,
Atop which grows that old familiar pang,
From which our rattling skeleton hangs its chimes.
But ... wait ...
Let us introduce here, to the baffled novitiate,
The ecological term: meromorphosis,
Which may be defined as the partial regeneration 
Of a lost art or scripture.  And as we see our 
Lung-lost twin twisting there, making wind's presence known
By 'is cold clatterings, some may be tempted now
To proclaim a manifesto, or worse, a revelation,
Usually along the chest-thumping lines of:
As a significant step towards a more ordered theosofee,
And the necessary scripsining of the Word,
We pledge our lives, our fortunes, and our sacred honors
To the establishment of our bested lives, our vaster fortunes,
And our sacrosunkt honors.  Allmen ... and so 1 and so forth ... 
There then will follow gobblygook about starbursts
And dwarf galleries, all very pseudo-astrillogic
In its own politicizing way, but not anything that will
Move to tears or laughter that lover whose eyes so twinkle.
Seems that after one conversion exploriance 
These newvogue kitsch half-hatchers imagine
That they can hack their way into paradise
With short-cutting aphoristic axes, 
Forgetting the untried but quite true ancient axiom
That what's learned with ease is forgotten in leisure.
Eventually, lamentably, we learn that our childhood
Was swallowed by a huge snake, and we cannot
Retrieve it simply by killing the rascal or by emetically
Mything it to vomit, since the sinuous curves of the cus
Is a surface map of the underground rivers that feed us.
What then shall it be: a Supernichural slyience
Or a hyperrational screed? Shall we, with mathematical
Prestige, attempt to circumscribe with numbers
The numbing persistence of the irrational?
Lead us not fall into that gravitational gravitas
Where nothing funreasonable can rest, but let us 
Maintain a slim stripe of animullity
By which we may make a moral-meta-euphoristical bed
Where we might sleep, propagate, scheme, or dream,
As the erosflick in the lover's eye intices.
Yes I said yes ...  But one trumperary MagagMahog
Is libel to be almost undoubtdoubly certain, 
That is, that the conclued-I-Nation will not disintegrate
Or be otherweird picked or blown apart
In any mutter of ways or whiles in anywise anticipated
By any Xperk commentator pretending to prognosticate.
It will come as a shock, and awe all but ONE.
And wouldn't you (and I 2), like to know who that 1 is?
No? This laughed entelechy, so long predacted, will yield no guesstions,
But will answer supremely every interogueative posed.  Ha!
It will be a hot day in heaven when that demon thaws to a close
With a vapered punct, with nothing left to pray for or prey on.
If indeed inny identity remains, is it a wee and not an I?
And have we arrived at the confluence of the fundementals,
Some coitusquietus of space and time, productive of scintillating beauty,
The original wavy cosmos combed to one creative coif,
The goddess of gossemer with insinuating hair,
Through which our wavery lifeflight makes migration,
Only to be fly-like webcaught in a vampyry.
Sin seared at last, have our final five sensory songs
Arrived at the end which pitches us Who knows where?
And were we then homeless on Earth, mad nomad exiles,
Ashamed to be seen from behind where our crimes are tranceparent?
To assume so is only Natural, 
But as dangerous in its dazzlings as is dark death.
But we, we are babblingly unnatural.
And whirled in the moving midst of these sad tidings, 
We are pleased to assume or assert this final question:
What else lights the night in our souls 
But these innocent infinite scatterings of stars 
Each one a sun in the sum of its own small glory.

Canto XXIX
We (the RoyAll we, not all you yous and some me mes)
Have been given thoughts, thoughts have
Definitely been grace gifted, and We are grieved
To have to say to Whom it may concern,
Almost, but not quite, as an asnide, 
In the anitcroon of heaven, where none condemn,
And far from the light of Blessèd's gazèdfest,
We say, Yes, we say, these still wan shadowy accusations: 
Although your synapses snap superbly,
And you are serpentinely cunning,
Your humor is all of the direrisive kind,
Meant only to sythe a smile on slobbering faces
Too ignorized by hate to truly laugh.
There!  Our prejudicial preludes are preposted,
And we may now preseed the coming
Of a fresher spring in these our wintery tears.
And with possible farther starsights, whish were
Hitherto unimarginable for that poor part of cUs
Erstwiley caught in our degraded state,
We might poettend to re-be a being of the Book.
Henceforth, we need not ask, we will be told,
And told with such melodious meltolease
That we will meld within this glow of love,
As if we merged with all its limitblissed glory.
For know, you other We's, who've flown this far,
That when the body has alchemized its grossness,
Finefinally seived through the sphinxsscare misframed Death,
It becomes pure ideational complexity,
With hypersenses, but no chunks churned as waste,
For here in heaven, there's no need for latrines;
All that exists is the hyper-ephermal template
More fluidly symbolic than gossamer dreams,
Emotive to the max, but sans fleshpains,
And clear as fairness is to blameless children.
All teetering imbalances, both out and in,
Macro and micro, here-rest and far-blest,
No longer oscilating twixt passing and to cum,
Nor angstly aquiver on the unfirm point
Of a timeless present diseased by meme mutations,
But all the is that is is one pure Isquest,
A single noplace so simultaneously swift
It has no need of intermediate motion.
Where is the image in space, the changes in time,
Which demonstate that these angelic jurymeadds
Have jettisuned the need for both foremembering
And regetting the cosmomologgiftmythemetacall proof
Of whirleds within worlds, ajests within errars, and cycles within psyches?
Not anywhere nor anytime et al.  Which leaves us what and how.
What are all these piles of ganglieons
Worming about whose feats?  Are they the smarts of babies
Now fully commingled with this inter-prism?  Are they 
Those who looked at the stars, the dim stars smeared
By the blightsweats of the city.  Yes, yes, they are those theys 
Who actually see the actuarial starts, light scratched
On the film of the really reeling illusion,
Which traces the  Gladness of the fully freed.
How due these other-wowwhirldly hyperdimensional theatricalls
Delete the mortal flickerings of canccured sparers,
When the body's wavering wobblitests 
Follow an harmonious nayrotical innocence,
Dense to dance, enthralled by sumwentweird beauty
And her beauteous springfall songs?  How do these theys
Flow circumpurely through the conjugational spine?
The how is the unification of all classes,
And the reconciliation of farce and tragedy,
The mothers of murdered infants, of starved children,
Or vicesaid curses, now seen as a scene of clowning, 
The blood unreal, as when the twisting vapors of mirage
Are shot through with an irised understanding,
Which suddenly relieves the grieving heart,
And breaks that stony sob that clogs the throat.
Then from the maw of the mouth magic E-merges:
The paleolithic prismaticalcomical bubbles —
So the hominit beast becomes a human speaker.
WhatHow is the interval slipped between this and that,
Between nothingness and all, so silent 
That It swallows every song, and yet so brief,
It births eternal singing.  That moment
Of no movement is the seed that in its zeroinstant
Precedes the birth of every mortal cosmos,
A pulse that rhytmatizes rhymes of reason
In hearts that throb the births and hertz of time.
Stop, if you can, and wait between pulse and pulse,
And you will see the HowWhat of love's power
Conjuring forth the images of love 
In all those shards of space and spurts of time.
From this one brilliant point whose constant spin
Has balanced the scales pitting noself and known nother,
The twin divinities, Desire and Love, 
Shine forth.  Thus the voice of the vestigial stranger
Is revealed in reciprocity's purest pause,
When the lovers lounge beneath a lovely tree,
And the langorous poet blends lute strings with softtext singing.
And we, wee 'umble royalls, bow crownless heads
Into that ever magical domain, where the child
Makes this great discovery: That he may turn his longings
Into talk.  Here is the interstellar medium, 
The galactical starbursts of inklings alight in darks,
Those bubbles above that pop in rainbowed mists,
Which make the child laugh, and spit new bubbles.
Does not the maturation of all eloquence
Delight in tracing patterns with these sprayed strays?
We shall knot be bound by society's nursery scolds,
But play with these randomwised chances for greater plays, 
Forever hypnotized by babybabble.
Know this: Except for its title, Book One is otherways blank.
Some will say we are barking, not even Sirius, mere frivolous devotees
Of the lesser Dog Star, the worshipers of Meanadds
And fatal Crones, nomading in exile,
In search of that bitch's tomb, whose rumbling
E-missions croak crowlike the sorrowful saddest fatal fates of doves.
They are those we's who stop their beliefs at what matters.
When the true husband of this degraded spouse —
He Who has seen through all 3 sheathes of corruption —
Now groks this radiant lovemaw, sighed fourth through breath,
He stops his laborsum futilities, leans back,
And nimbletwiddles aroundaround in psychles
His handy propitius utile opposable thumbs.
His pursed lips part and he breaks his mask with laughter.
We babeblurs have learned to trip backwords those three-phazed steps —
The corporeal, the intermarriedate, and the visionary —
To fold back larynxly to the 4/1 Phonemantic Emmanator,
The 1/4 whatfor Who, who has passed from precept's prisons,
To the freedom which shines beyond perceptual wails,
Where all play still the One point 0 fun verseshone 
Of an everrenewing, everbeguiling Real.  Yes, 
Yes, of course there is a heaven, 
And Notsurely, also our earthly conception of heaven,
The first is effaced with our first bewailing breath,
And the letter recompenses with our last.
In the last, the reign of riches is unceasing,
There is no lack, there is no midnight swoon,
And in the first,
The birth aquires a skin that blocks believing.
But these small matters, like infants, require feeding,
They prove as yet we are wee, and must milk stars,
Or else the pap we get will be cold blooded,
The blood of the mirror image we call Christed.
But wait, fate ... something astoundingly brief
But persistent, flashes.  All these conflicting, 
Conflated discords flare, and in their merderous delusions,
A backwar cordage of living linkages twine.
Thus the raveled sleeves of their woolied shleeps reknit,
And unreconcilables royally reconcile.
The mutually annihilating, trigger happy heads
Unite the combatants' hearts under sparkwhite shrouds,
Each foe a waked as Won in rapt surrender.

Canto XXX
At this point in our downword assent, we must make
Retribution to that skeletal sibling who never departed
Our earthly mother's womb, and whose unpotentiated
Spirit resides in the marrow of our unenumerated bones.  
When we try to count them each number says 
We know that all life's fire burns rite here, in real read glory, 
And that such fire flows, is also volcanically known.  
Hence the lava of the unsaid,
Charcoaled by the hearth fires of communal talk
Becomes the magmatism of written words, fixed upon
The membrane of our Play tonic cave walls, now
Made porous by our purifying questshamanings.
Have we all gone up in a puff of breath or smoke?
No, below these ephemory are the original talking sticks,
And we now may utilize these shafts of charcoal
As the soul drawing/writing instrewbits,
Which may express the mythogram
Of our enternal entities.  These glyphs
Suckle starlight, and we grope them
In night's deep dark, and if we touch them
With our ears or eyes, or taste them with our tonguetalk,
That light will burst between our heres,
Ignite our brains and hearts, and free us to ferally be ... Ah!
Ah! To be, to finally be on the vortical course 
Of all the brilliant galaxies of Self.  Here's here,
As at the chosen center of the cosmological spin,
Is still to the point of ecstasy ... and more ... 
Much more, IT lives at the very portal to preparental coitus.
Here we find those divine aspects of Who is most reticent.
Yes, Who will speak, and Who's words will spawn what is,
But few will lasten to Who's lessun, while lost in their welter of gabblegab,
Which turns them to tittling pixels 
Far thinner than those Indian ant-mandible-riddled scrolls,
Which, when not made too Holey,
Will tell the fortunes of our incarnations.
The meremadons are marching to perdition,
And in commensal solidarity seek the underground cure
For all their bustling ills.  While we, who are not so cleverly cohesive,
Accomplish so smutch morphs by blighting one another.
How strange to find on the underside of fret
A kingdom of light-fed roots far underground.
But, why digrass? 
How trivial a truth to say, at the climax of our trials,
I die, and yes, the mothering matter does cause
The fatherfroth to exit the body, and enter the doubterauthor.
But so what if we are all spirited away, below to the chthonic
Worm realm, where the feasting fisheyes school,
Or above with the avian armadas' swallow-winged insecttexts.
This fate is only trivial to that opaque corpseskin
Dubbed the organ sack, but to the tranceparency
Afloat in the aftermyth, it pulsates a glorious glabrous path.
My breathern, my dear duped breathurn, etcetera, acksickteara ... 
Behold! that sect of devotion has devolved
To debotched dullardism, willfully ignorant 
Of the livedfacts in any of the three Divinest Worlds.
Know: IT has no interest in propping up any of our despicable buggotries,
IT — in ITS shehe splendor — deals souly in blissful wonder.  
You savvy THAT I Am
Only with the complete annihilation of unreason's wreckconing:
Submission of mind and body, rapt in spirit's eithers.  Go on,
Bring out all the old martyrdumby clichés and make another
Thoughtbanned Bible from cover to black covert nothing butt the sad sheddings
Of a pack of junkyard shaggy dung stories,
The shadows of mere babelings blankityblanking the Word.
Ixnay on that atininLay sluggardizing, and the same goes too
For allah'ts aped posited theocult jawjewed rivills.
Whatever's not the pure pukka practice of love,
Is but the piratical plunderings of posers,
Whish all ingenuous aspirants eschew.
If love unlecherously has truly blinded you,
You must slide where — with snakelike thirsty tongue —
Your neweyes taste the sweet of that sphered river
That runs alike onunder and skysurrounds. 
What had fallen with sparks has risen petalrosed.
Rejoisted, and cum to gather into one.
Bright now, all of your dupled formerde tryphanies,
In the zeroed blanking of a sigh, 
Will be utterly muteally quietly mystally changed.
Remember those vermenites hermiting in the desert, 
How all their daunting ravings uniflayed you?
Is theirs the baptide font that greens your starkness,
And brinks waste acres of sansduns into floewer?
Nomad no more in exile, are you home?  Know: 
Not quite yet, but still the rest is best to come.
Quite possibly you are shocked to find your murderous person
Now brazenly crossing the threshold of those arc temples
Housing the pentup brain, and as casually excited as any theater goer,
Imagining yourself at last behind the scenes,
And choosing what masks fate's actors will now wear.
Certainly the police are on to you by now,
And can spot the lumpen culprit of such crimes
Unhidden among the magnitudes of stars.  You look around
For the arresting officers, but none appear.
Your limbs feel pierced by multitudes of spears.
But these are spears of light, shucked out of constellations
To fix your high above the zodiac, as calm as any ecstasy 
Could concieve.  You watch the wheels of time roll slowly round,
As though your unmoved mind were their firm axle.
What maestro or professorial emeritus is wise enough
To jettison their conditioned pseudo profundities,
And learn from the calm of a grandparent
Contemplating the excitement of their grandchild
At play in a muddled puddle?  And what revolutionary seed
Gleams from an adolescent eye afire with its first love?
Stop!  Wait!  What the Hate-ease are you saying?  Haven't you
Seen the results of those experiments that prove
That the child unconsciously assimilates happy similitudes,
But when confronted by dissimulation 
Undergoes that maladaption known collectively as —
Ascareness.  Would you have us be less canny than a child?
And can the child who dumbly picks his knows, 
Meaure galactical readshifts, or map the geometries 
Of the cosMos'es darkquest matters,
Or bring down the sleeping tablets that damn
Those cavorting around the golden laugh?
Note, therefore, this gnosis: Without a patois
Of the present revivifying what was and vivifying what is to be,
No cosmological entity can exist, only a punyverse
Filled with physical hungers, with lusts, with fear and pain,
And the dead-eyed jawdrooling terror of opaque Death — 
A recipe full of witless numskull conundrums,
Which thump duh thump the same motivic rhythms 
Productive always of sluggovacuous boredom.
What, then, is the pharmacon for this diementia?
We must reverse smarts' process to be freed:
Simple answers to complex questions, 
And complex sedatives for the simple minded.
The Word knows nothing, is never didactically smug,
Offers no bandwidth pulses of information,
Is no more educational than a sunbeam ... 
But O! O! O! how lightly its loving jests
Do make us laugh with its ROYstirUS rambling creations.
Still, to sit with the distaff view, I would not like you to think
That I am just spinning the wool over your Awe-woked eyes.
Like all other metamorphic writes, even such light-hearted
Flummery as this, becomes, when ardently pursued,
A martyrous matter of austarities, and you might
Be well advised, in the midst of these ecstasies,
To restrain yourself by assuming a crouching posture,
As if you are far underground, and entering
A narrow wedge of cave.   Because, odd to say,
You might not be able to tell the dark from light.
But there's no place on this leveled spelunker's map
That says horizon, no guidance for generalizing sentimentalists,
And even if you deign to nod in their general direction,
And give them a Nay for E-ffort, you might strike
Your pate against hard pitrock and come away leaving
A woolied thread of blood.  That skeleton twin
Referred to high above, can only be born
In this hole where the sun never shown,
And he alone can say, with the straightest faceleft:
Our mutual mother spawned lonely forgetfoulness.
But take care not to delay 'though the way 
Is serpentinely dirtydark, or you'll suffer the usual 
Post mortem condemnation, excommunicated
By a jeery of your fears, after your tongue is dead
To validation.  The Papal Bullroarers of Poptheolitics
Tell us that the tenuation of internal and external temperatures
Must be regulated in a certain range: not too high, not too low,
Which love can never do.   Its fillness has its own imperitives:
The medicine of extremes, but extremes that bestow many blessings
On the many and the true, and cause no symptoms
To any except the lover, Who hides Who's light
Under the big exculpatory bushall 
Of every fright's excruciating nails.
Know that the Lover whose who is Who,
And Who even now is fatly nearing that gap
In thin Time's sinuous line, where Who can befun
A scintillation, a sparkling into that synethesiaradiating sphere
Within Who's ever ballooming geotrancer 
All possible presents' innumerable points, brillantly spyre and dance —
A man and a woman walking hand and hand
So that the sweetness of their loving lights
Become unbearable to trust for those whose celibate lusts
Are blind to this realliteracy.  O give an Amen, dear Breathurns,
A loud Awespin!  How wondrous it is that mouths are everywhere,
As Maestro Atem Molickuleer well knows: mouths for biting
Nourishment, and for kissspeaking.  And those Who know this,
Swear, by thunderous fires and mountainous clouds of jokes,
That they are insatiable tigers forever fraught 
With cavernous cravings for light's good fare of fortune.
On lignum and gristle that others starve when scarfing,
They suckle a difficult mother's milk that soothes.
And when that exhortation clabbers in,
What clamors out is pure exultant praise.

Canto XXXI
Our aspirant, embalmed with sweetgood honey, 
Propels acsent by shooting from his squinter
Purefumes of roses, plus birds of dazesling stars,
Such which, when he turns aftwords in his flight,
Act as a rudderous trimtab to guide him home.
He has, by mixing metalores, arrived where the angles soften
And sinlesslysinuouslyserpentinely ganglion
Joyentrancing melodious lyrics much like the tune
Which says: Betold, last shleeps, you are sheepfolded
In the Doughmain, where Cos, the Uncaused Causmolojest,
Ventriloquizes the vox that is Creation, 
Where light outblazons light, and without sleyes,
Shis hEars the multitudinous prayzers, tiered after mortal tears,
Renewing their flesh as imperishable ideas.  Herawe!  Hiszawe!
As Deans of this Royall court, they dance their spheres 
Round the round rounding brightlightfartherfix,
Which magically prospells them.
Thus the aspirant, RDD, at his witz send,
And sniffing this fullsome Easteræther, 
Becomes his own hound of heaven, catching
With his own jawbreakable grip 
The throat of his own doubter self, most ravenous to gnaw
His merely human speaking apparati,
And diejest them back to a theoloonical 0. 
All those clods of clots which clumped you
Into the last massed frumps of your mortal dismentia,
Go Proof! as the clogged breath that has to be recycled
Becomes an ever-loving inspiration, alive
Where life is felt as the pulse of ALL.
No more exitless trudges through gravity's grounds
Of spongy prig mire!  No more stench of knows-deep despair!
No more grunging for meaning in the addict's painspam!
You are free!  Free!  Your whole blobby is floating
In a spree of consensus, conscious of everyfling as joy!
Here we hear the convocating cachinnators,
Whose canti connote this curious correlation:
Those best able to laugh are those most able in love. 
Wait.  But and if, are you really asking us to berieve
That there's a whizzdumb in the hovel of this drivel,
Some mudwump of stardust muddling through life's strife?
Yes.  Proclaim: He who doubts from what he hears,
Will near believe from what he fears.  Wait. 
When the whaters swirl Blackean, you can bet
They're about to clear.  And clear they do,
Leaving us asking, in our silent thrall,
What lights this swirl, whose sparklingswarming lumins,
Swabbing with honey earth's opacities, 
Baste them translucent, like the the wings of bees, 
ITs everlasting bolts, which black earthoptics,
Uniting spirit's leer with cosmic glory?
Is this then that circulating sphere, 
The blastedblessèd call the Brooke of the Heart,
The whater ifs that wash the grunging fears
Out of the noose of ghoost murther's scarytells,
The flip of the tail of the delvall under the bet,
Which stings the angsty babecling from calm sleep?
The ancient infant has fed a long long's spine 
On the winding, knotted gruel of thin Time's liesions,
And here as the Now jumps over the sickle swoon, we shout: Ei!  I!
How this milky whey condenses all the stars
To a brillaint circling of syllables, our cellves their center.
This poignancy would weep all moisture
From our bones and bodies, finding as we do
The love that has always sustained us,
Far, far off, and far above, in hir appointed station,
Among the always circlers all rays circling, and we, left
With no guiding light but the old fellow of our oldblesst self,
Tripping upon his beard of light, and knowing nothing's in his brightest robe,
But the rattle of bones, keeping eternity's time,
And directing his eyeless sockets to where distance
Is no barrier, the farthest far resonantly rappouring
As if it were the nearest near our hearts.  O!
Isn't this what we all ways always longed for: 
No know-thing left to fear?
Pause.  Is this what they called the royall Wealth of Pleased,
The riches which cure Time's poverty with for Ever?
Attend.  This is no rerereaded apologetic sorry,
But a comprehensive erasure of contrition,
Those self-tormenting questions that starred the air,
And burned the trillions of bodily cells with ire,
Are seen for what they are: the doubter's 
Circuloreities of circuts, which fill unceasingly 
Our foamous patient, with all the world's anonymous
Dose of pain.  To be purged, it is not enough
To endure the ulitmates of evil's Mangallall perversions,
But to feel that you yourself are Doctor Deed
In murdering the twin child of your soul, 
And that having trialed and witnessed yourself guilty,
Nothing remains to be done but the execution
Of your vile histories of disease.  You are finally
Past cure, and finally free.  When these roses rotate,
We are dazzled by the presuppositionless spectacle,
Not so much as a stamen as contracted petals,
But the petals as expandingments of the stamen, all shown
As lights that are more than mates the I,
That wheel of fortune fortune's crowning weal.
We have come to the unmarkable spot
That X no longer signifies as fate, but rather
The meeting and mating of bright wordsong.
But haven't we suffered in the mere blind act of being?
And haven't our hyperinsensitivities, 
Compacted in neutronic density masses
So heated the core of our hurt, that when exploding,
They make supernovae of victims tumbling around us?
Yes.  Yes.  But one whiff of that rose from the astral lover,
And our vacumous night is filled with the joy of healing.
Listen, this is not supposed to make sequential sense,
The orientazing old sorcerer in his hirsuit of black leather amor,
When he lifts his left hand and makes the jestjeer STOP,
That is the lover's signal to approach.  We want to cry.
Can it be that our little Bee-brain hums the Alpha of all Creation?
What can this none sense mean?  It means: Embrace your executioner,
Give him a coin to give to his widowed mother,
Tell him your neck is short and to look to his honor,
When Good is watching, you don't want to bungle your axkwork. 
Know: the only way you will thrive is without your head.
Why keep promoting the carnage in incarnation?
Without attaching the prefix preseedling re-pentence,
Even a headstonedblockdead like yoursluff
Possesses intearnally partrickles capable 
Of every dimensional freedom of Xtension.
All Whos here now imagine how hordes of devils
Goat-gamboling in rutterish wobble-rounds
Have angelified to hosts of graced menuettoes.
Bow.  Curtsey.  Display your MostArt superbsanity,
Move to the music of the spheres.  It is exquisite eloquence
Mate music.  It is apotheosis.
In these operations, we have divinitized the skill
Of generalization.  With our omnigut, we eat all things; 
With our flexible head, we see all things; 
With our flittering fingers, we make many miracles; 
With our fleet feet, we run gazells to ground,
And dance nimbler than a crowhop on an arkprow;
We, with our voices, may sweetly outsing the dove,
And with the conjunction brain/heart/lungs & tongue,
We may commit the ultimate cosmic crhyme, 
More sprightly than dancodells, more brilliant than jewels or stars, 
Which is to say and sing: make poetry.
Of course in our hoarse vocal races,
We should like nothing better than to alienize
Our most intimate of intimators, make whispering
Innuendos from what rightfilly oft to be clarion calls,
But the photon finish, closer than a whisker,
Smears its hypnotic shimmers on everything,
Suspending All's All in the effluent of words.
Look, pals and gals, signs say it is high time
We said so long to all our quicktick clocktalk.
The Void Humorgous Gravitos at the sintear
Is calling home Shis myriad babes of stars
To give a festival feast for their prodigal feats.
We need do nothing now but wait, wait, wait.
Wait with the patience of those eccentric hermits
Who coax wild birds to take seed from their hand.
The amniotic water has been forded;
Our sippy cup awaits the final flood.
This, not of water, but of living light.
If this is danger pouring in beyond us,
Although our changing's been imperceptable,
The change itself is as stark in its appearance
As the change that turns our corpus to a corpse.
Why tremble at disintegrated power,
Light only spears your gushing pulse with jests,
And we bleed nothing but this wisdom's pith:
You are not the apogee of creation, rather
A critical part of ITs foundation.  Therefore,
Believe that what you bear exalts you.
Take heart in the rootedness of your despair.
Stories fall down, but storytalesings rise.
We only need re-mumble two bright savewords.
When you plunge down:
Drink up.

Canto XXXII
Magic?  Of course I believe in IT, otherWise
I would be unable to be bestowed any
Miracle for which we have yet no logical
Explanation, my eye as it were forever opaquely lidded
By the membrane of my ignorance, and my mouth, toothless
To masticate any truth, not already redly — like the food
Of wolfpups or hatchling birds — predigested
By the monstrous maw of the parental collective.
That my I am is a baby, I do confess,
And that the joys of starmilk feed my bliss
With the cosmic mother-motion,
I do admit, but I hold this secretion secret,
Lesst the proflensor emertcuss of radical reason
Upset my naivete with the pall of depotentiated
Understanding.  Here, put this rose to your knows,
Are not its purefumes transporting? — Paradise
Of the olefactories manufacturing divinity's images.
The breath that brought the scent goes, but the images remain,
In a state of consciousness aptly named transcendence,
A place restoring the fire-sealed Garden of Eden,
And redeifying the innocent Atoms of Evesing.
Does the darkness of Death approach?  No matter.
This light of the Word is a torch which touches all things.
What is it then which fuels this magic torch?
Let us name names.  My name is: (your name here);
Your name is (my name here); their names are:
(Those whom you love named here); 
Our names are: (the entire litany of names).  
There, now we know that the abracadabra of the ultimate magic
Is what we say to conjure forth our love.
What?  Are you asking us to believe at this belated
Latternast, that all that we had to do
Was to read these simplistic simplicities
From an obvious simpleton, and that the patience
That we have thus far exibited in following
These chronic comedic clown chronicals
Was to love the processor of this time wastage
And to sip this clarified elixer of mind merde
As if it were true, because it is heartfelt?
Yes.
That is exactly what I am asking.
Listen now, I implore you.
The clown I would entreat you to sanctify
Is the mute between the soundings,
Drownings, and flailings, who understands,
In his eternal extremis, that although
He may be percieved to have serious liesions 
Near the superior portions of the temoral lobes,
So that all along this longest of longings
He has been filling your golden spitoon with the unsavory
Products of that syndrom wherein his disease
Manifests as empty speech, muddled puddles
Incapable of clarifying his saliva-expressed ideas,
Bizarre paraphrastic wrong-wordism, and bumbling neOHlogisms.
I can assure you that even in this fundament 
Of deepest darks, he brings a unifying glorioso,
And can unfailing touch his tongue to the tip of his knows,
And speak heart to heart to any heart who hears.
He has brought you (your name here) to the brink
Of falling or flight, along this long runway,
Whose twists and turns have been forever pretzelized
In order that the speed you had to acquire to navigate them
Is now indistinguishable from utter stillness.  Wait.  Listen.
What does your Now need to hear?  The continued deviation?
The theobrutish lectern lecteurer?  What good
Is the bullheaded bullit point, the abrogating abbreviation,
The asinine aphorism, the wonky witticism
When what is required for your salvation is a potent dose
Of eccentricity to help you eccentrify yourself to a self
Deserving of an Identity, in brief, of a name through which
Love may be mightily magnetized?  Though love is a zero-womb
That can birth all things, your-name-here is the me
Of a lightning rod, whose very uniqueness summons
The cosmic strike, and adds your specialized self
To the gendered genres of all the generations.
All those figure-phrases who have ruin'd amuck
Of you muddled cerebraille are sered to living flame
By the fork of this one lewd Word.  You're dazed,
But lit the tongue of that fork release what you have learned.
Say it, if only to appease your hungry self:
Her material smile's spectacle is so actual 
That its bolt of sun, striking my plainet of crisis,
Shatters to vapeers every formher reflection
Of merdwhore consternation, and suddenly
I see the whise trudge west, towards night and rest,
As the whole procession of her wonders guide me
From this lusterless funeral to our marriage right.
She weals my exile through multidudes of brights,
And parades me east to my Syble home of birth.
Good.  Good.  Now we are primed to prime the pump
Of our endings to the brink of those waters whose life
Begins our renewal.  This THIS must end with a flash
And not awe fade-out.  Our sequence of non-sequiturs
Segues now to that pivot where all serpentining 
Nearnarration burgeons to that ONE magisterial metaphor
Whose simple structure sustains complexity's mazes.
We discover that the membrane which imprisons
Is also the memebrane which defines, and that all our
Meditations on the kinddom were always winnowed down
Through know-light's dwarfs: the fee-foe-Phylum, 
The Class of dunces, the Orders of disorder, the fickle Family, 
The genus which worked unceasingly through the ages
Yet never produced one infantile of genius,
And finally the Species, where we're no angels
Danced in their numberless bumblings
Upon One simple pinhead named the I.
My I (your name here) could not be fixed in water,
Because what's the matter there is always flowing.
It could not be written in sand, because winds will efface it.
Therefore, that More One had to be out-lawed
On the eternal sky in letters spelling stars.
Your I is a physical body of black radiation
So hot that it shines from within with your starry name.
When the proofs of the experiments are in,
We need no longer heed the preseedling chaos.
Or so the avatars hiding behind all screens
Would have us believe with all their shiny ill-loser-rings.
And how odd it is to search inside of the I
And to everywhere see hints of vast populations,
Of wholes so black they must be galactical scars.
It is enough to make one cry and believe in magic.  
You say: Home wasn't built in a day: reason it out.
But now I discover it was built in a nanoinstant
Unmeasurable in its interminable moment.
Listen, I beg, you, attend a little deeper,
There is music here that evokes the archetypal,
The episodic epochs, the musing modes,
The scales that ascend and descend
In the pulses of time, are they not conjured forth 
From the music of the psyche, their contrapuncted
Inhormoneous motions, finding through cadance
And climax those melodious throes uniquely
Singing through I's history, which has no other
Canticle but its own?  Ask yourself this:
Are your site sets vast enough
To generate subsets that shine with the aura of truth,
And could that lonely nugget interred in the mass
Be re-versed engineered to re-create Creation?
This BOOK to be read in the volumes of the dust
Has a blank page first and last, which are not numbered.
Refer to the alleglossary for specifics.
And what do we find when we do so: a plethora 
Of absurd UbiTricksters, ridiculous spiritual dwarfs,
Far too much like ourselves to rule a cosmos.
And what do these tricksters tell us with truthing lies:
They tell us that the Zeitgeist misnamed magic 
Is a jungle that the physical eyes — bat-blind 
To most metaphysics and to all of pataphysics —
See greens as a desert of algorithmic blanddunes.
Stop.  Note the feeling of blessedness that arises
When you ponder the depth and scope of these impositions.
Note that the entire enterprise of poetry evolves
From any number of private rituals
Designed to make the furtive neurotic
A mirror in which he might with a great,
Puffed up self-delusion 
Contemplate his ridiculous importance.
This imagemonger is the poet, 
The one bumpkin who will not tolerate
Being spied upon by his own internal judges,
The one singer who has accepted dithering 
As a justifyable devotional delight.
Should it matter that his celebrations
Include his lamentations for the sacrifices
He has ritualistically mutilated,
And that all his prognostications
From the blood flow, were no more accurate
Than two plus true equals thrive?
Among the more distraught and violent partisans,
It is scripturalized that the teeth must be sharpened
For biting through.  That is unlightly to be true.
The mouth most certainly is mused,
With the tongue and lungs and all their apparati.
But that which is firmly fixed in flexible verse,
May nourish itself without the need to grind.
Success and joy may come as smooth as milk
Even to infants begotten by Miss Adventsure.

Canto XXXIII
Stopped.  Ah, MeMaw, filled with grace, 
We feel so safe, we need no longer cower in our bunkers, 
Nor spew our syllables out of terror's bowel bricks,
Nor raze our mightly citadels out of fear.
The loud below our hairlines has been stilled,
Our angelhair taproots synapSing revelies
Like figuring flames arranging what's run amok.
Your love has sweetened all our cerebral pudding,
Our tasting tongues so glad they've turned all No's
Into love's most simple syllable of YES.
Our beginnings are blended through one rose begun.
And isn't it strange, my loves, that here, at the end,
We find ourselves wonderfully poised before the beginning.
Now is the win where the devolving heart 
Can re-evolve, out of its iceberg's melt,
In a revolution nulling interrogations
With first word lifebed confessions made of vows.
We are told that now we may happily reside
In that blessèd Inn of the InnEffable.
It is really smoothly flowing, this milk of human kindness,
This tastiest antidote to all our griefs.
Here in this paradise differences abound,
Yet there's no whiff of odorous deviation,
For every dance style compliments all others,
And every vocalizer harmonizes.
This is all very simple, a literal gaff of grace,
But it's not so easy for those encased in armor
For a splintering roy of sunsight to sneak in,
Their defense against freely proffered evergladrest, 
The laziest chainmaul cloaks of shame and fear, 
And the arrogant need to always fiddlefallow
Only those bulletpointed smarmurries 
That satiate yet never satisfy them.  
A radical martyrous passion for submission 
Is needed to strip us back to that nudity
Where our feedus floats through joy in this starry womb.
How do you do your introductions now, 
When all our priggy sty I's, suppurating,
No longer morn in supplication, 
And have finally stopped I-magining 
That any unease excludes realities,
Your pourpetual spend of breath, not calmed
By Death's claimation, but rather resuscitated
In meditations where the incessant genocidal tides
Are turned to retune to perpetual regeneration.
Progression has stopped because IS is completed.
Now you have passed past passing and have come
To where your clot of dust is human hearted,
And your pulp of milkydimensional motherpulse
May animate your tongue with rosy starwise.
When such a bolt of lightning nourishment
Hallows the body, even as it fills it,
Our physical organs of evolution's substance
Are made divine by the accidents of time,
And glowing as a book with numberless pages
They suddenly fuse in one unutterable word,
And that one word the seed of praise and prayer.
We shall blaze speechless before this splendid image
As if we saw in our own mirrored faces
Infinitudes visages, each our own, and each as equally
All those whom we love.  Oh, even as the memory
Of this joy dissolves as sandy glyphs dissolve in waves,
Each wave imprints infinity's sequent seconds 
So do we feel such joy that we forget
A greater joy awaits us in that instant,
Which cannot be called Next because IT's timeless.
This sleepless I who sees his daughter's birth
And all the highest joy that moment brings
Merges this tick with the talk of his mother's death,
And all the deep compassion of that passing —
One circling clock encompassing all emotion.
That that gray women rising from her grave
Older than time, but younger than this infant,
Should bring the milk to sooth his physical body,
And ready its mortality for more, 
Now resurrects herself to feed that son
Whom she abandoned to time's turbulent ocean, 
Fixing his birth for the 14th billion time 
To the summer of every cosmicround horizon.
This universe of speech, shaped like a scarab,
Reflects upon its iridescent wings
The music of all the stars whose lights say: Sing.
So many variations superimposed
In harmonies overlapped, but never blurred,
So many quanta of bursting energies
Between the margins of presence and of absence.
Oh how primordial are these fluctuations
And how they tame with optimal affection
These violent stirrings convulsing cosmic pleasures.
This may mean nothing to anyone to say:
I have arrived, yet still I am to come,
And yet all forms assert such with a name.
And having been so blessed, and having entered
This field of information theorizing,
The named ones, blind and lame, and deaf and dumb
And marred by cruel senescence since their births,
And having aged and aged through all the ages,
Dragging themselves through the dust of all the questions,
Without the least capacity to answer, discover, mutely,
Yes, indeed it's true, the equations do not equivocate,
But leave their felt-for petroglyphs as guides
Where even fingertips may coax forth light.
I am who I am and that's enough to be,
Though coffined in mortality's stony skin,
I straighten all baffles with hyperbole,
And find my lost self centered in selfless sun,
Speaking a beacon of thwarted bestial cries
Whose inarticulations coalesce
Into a stuttering humanity.
I only speak one word, but that word frees.
I have sharpened my shard of flint to make one point,
And with that spear I've pierced the heart of sorrow,
Which sanguinates the petals of a rose.
Father and son, scapegoat and savior,
I have averted my crimes in the saintly traditions
Of chants, of lights, of sighs, 
And of all the vestments of majesty's processions,
Where all the supplicants dance to skiens of music.
I have purged my transgressions in the muddled shallow puddle
Made fathomlessly clear as poetry pooled.
I have rerendered confusion's poisons as healing nectars
And made the complex simple, the simple complex.
Among all the saddest litanies of the holocaust
I have cast the joyous spell of wondrous redemption.
I have sensitized my touch through humble blindness
And can taste the braille of light through my dumb tongue.
I have meditated on the echo's echo,
And have found in these ghosts of sound the profoundest scripture.
My types and classifications make myth fact
And coax from the mists of surmise the actual.
I have summoned the mole god and the rat god,
The bat god and the snake god from their homes
In the hole of the verminous human mind,
And have ask them if they are independent worlds
Or the products of my diseased imagination,
And they replied, as my power animal chorus:
The question you ask is moot.
And hearing the mirth behind their malicious answer,
I have laughed my destructive hells of sanity
All the way back through their reasonable lines of logic
To reinhabit these insane tangled paths,
Wherein the altar of my genius shines,
My synapses flaring out through metaphors
Which touch all touchable things hid in the maze. 
I have stilled the dynamics of change, while forever changing.
My breath is mountainous, my flesh is thunder.
I have split my identity into so many splinters
They increase my abject poverty to wealth.
The legs of my bedtime stories have fatally cracked,
Yet I've persevered to feed on my destruction.
Like shoals of fishes in shoals of fisheries,
I have schooled my silvery flashes to golden wisdom.
The riches above have flooded the voids below,
And I have drowned myself in seas of treasure,
Never taking one penny to plump my vast misfortunes.
Although in this litany of I's, my I comes last,
I have learned to revere the dust beneath my feet,
And thus I have let the ashes of the dead
Most humbly nourish all my flowers' roots.
I have turned my kinships into kindnesses,
And by so doing have insured my virtues
By simply completing this task I have been given.
I have oraculized the oracles and made them oral
And written them down where even blind eyes read.
I have made my separate I a sanctified we,
And I sing from Now Where, how we love to be.


Finished: Kentfield, California, 2022
